DIGITAL NOTES
ON

CYBER SECURITY

(R18A0521)






B.TECH III YEAR – II SEM (R18)

(2020-2021)


       DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

MALLA REDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING & TECHNOLOGY
(Autonomous Institution – UGC, Govt. of India)

Recognized under 2(f) and 12 (B) of UGC ACT 1956

 (Affiliated to JNTUH, Hyderabad, Approved by AICTE - Accredited by NBA & NAAC – ‘A’ Grade - ISO 9001:2015 Certified)

Maisammaguda, Dhulapally (Post Via.     Hakimpet), Secunderabad – 500100, Telangana State, India



CYBER SECURITY Page 1




MALLA REDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY

III Year B.Tech II Sem                                                                   L   T/P/D   C
                                                                                                  3   -/-/- 3


(RA18A0521) CYBER SECURITY

(Professional Elective 2)

Course objectives:

 To understand various types of cyber-attacks and  cyber-crimes

 To learn threats and risks within context of the cyber security
 To have an overview of the cyber laws & concepts of cyber forensics
 To study the defensive techniques against these attacks



UNIT -I

Introduction to Cyber Security: Basic Cyber Security Concepts, layers of security,
Vulnerability, threat, Harmful acts, Internet Governance – Challenges and Constraints,
Computer Criminals, CIA Triad, Assets and Threat, motive of attackers, active attacks,
passive attacks, Software attacks, hardware attacks, Cyber Threats-Cyber Warfare, Cyber
Crime, Cyber terrorism, Cyber Espionage, etc., Comprehensive Cyber Security Policy.

UNIT - II

Cyberspace and the Law & Cyber Forensics: Introduction, Cyber Security Regulations,
Roles of International Law. The INDIAN Cyberspace, National Cyber Security Policy.

Introduction, Historical background of Cyber forensics, Digital Forensics Science, The
Need for Computer Forensics, Cyber Forensics and Digital evidence, Forensics Analysis
of Email, Digital Forensics Lifecycle, Forensics Investigation, Challenges in Computer
Forensics


UNIT - III

Cybercrime: Mobile and Wireless Devices: Introduction, Proliferation of Mobile and
Wireless Devices, Trends in Mobility, Credit card Frauds in Mobile and Wireless
Computing Era, Security Challenges Posed by Mobile Devices, Registry Settings for
Mobile Devices, Authentication service Security, Attacks on Mobile/Cell Phones,
Organizational security Policies and Measures in Mobile Computing Era, Laptops.

UNIT- IV

Cyber Security: Organizational Implications: Introduction, cost of cybercrimes and IPR
issues, web threats for organizations, security and privacy implications, social media
marketing: security risks and perils for organizations, social computing and the associated
challenges for organizations.

CYBER SECURITY Page 2




UNIT - V

Privacy Issues: Basic Data Privacy Concepts: Fundamental Concepts, Data Privacy
Attacks, Datalinking and profiling, privacy policies and their specifications, privacy policy
languages, privacy in different domains- medical, financial, etc

Cybercrime: Examples and Mini-Cases

Examples: Official Website of Maharashtra Government Hacked, Indian Banks Lose
Millions of Rupees, Parliament Attack, Pune City Police Bust Nigerian Racket, e-mail
spoofing instances. Mini-Cases: The Indian Case of online Gambling, An Indian Case
of Intellectual Property Crime, Financial Frauds in Cyber Domain.


TEXT BOOKS:

1. Nina Godbole and SunitBelpure, Cyber Security Understanding Cyber
Crimes,Computer Forensics and Legal Perspectives,Wiley


2. B.B.Gupta,D.P.Agrawal,HaoxiangWang,ComputerandCyberSecurity:Principle

s, Algorithm, Applications, and Perspectives, CRC Press, ISBN
9780815371335,2018.



REFERENCES:

1. Cyber Security Essentials, James Graham, Richard Howard and Ryan Otson,
CRCPress.


2. Introduction to Cyber Security, Chwan-Hwa(john) Wu,J. David Irwin, CRC Press

T&FGroup.


Course Outcomes:

The students will be able to:

1. Analyze cyber-attacks, types of cybercrimes, cyber laws and also how to protect

them self and ultimately the entire Internet community from such attacks.

2. Interpret and forensically investigate security incidents

3. Apply policies and procedures to manage Privacy issues

4. Design and develop secure software modules







CYBER SECURITY Page 3




                  MALLA REDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING & TECHNOLOGY

                            DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY





S. No Topic Page no

Unit
I

1 Cyber security introduction -Basics 5

I
2 Layers of Security 9

I Security vulnerabilities, threats and Attacks
3 11

I
4 Cyber Threats-Cyber-Warfare 16

II
5 Cyberspace and the Law & Cyber Forensics 19

II
6 National Cyber security Policy 22

II
7 Cyber Forensics 23

III
8 Cybercrime-Mobile and wireless devices 30

III
9 Security Challenges proposed by Mobile devices 34

IV
10 Cyber security-Organizational Implications

IV
11 Social Media Marketing

V
12 Privacy Issues-Data Privacy attacks

V
13 Privacy Policy Languages










CYBER SECURITY Page 4




UNIT-I

Introduction to Cyber Security

Cyber Security Introduction - Cyber Security Basics:

Cyber security is the most concerned matter as cyber threats and attacks are overgrowing.
Attackers are now using more sophisticated techniques to target the systems. Individuals,
small-scale businesses or large organization, are all being impacted. So, all these firms
whether IT or non-IT firms have understood the importance of Cyber Security and focusing
on adopting all possible measures to deal with cyber threats.

What is cyber security?

"Cyber security is primarily about people, processes, and technologies working together to
encompass the full range of threat reduction, vulnerability reduction, deterrence, international
engagement, incident response, resiliency, and recovery policies and activities, including
computer network operations, information assurance, law enforcement, etc."

OR

Cyber security is the body of technologies, processes, and practices designed to protect
networks, computers, programs and data from attack, damage or unauthorized access.

 The term cyber security refers to techniques and practices designed to protect digital
data.

 The data that is stored, transmitted or used on an information system.

OR

Cyber security is the protection of Internet-connected systems, including hardware, software,
and data from cyber attacks.

It is made up of two words one is cyber and other is security.

 Cyber is related to the technology which contains systems, network and programs or
data.

 Whereas security related to the protection which includes systems security, network
security and application and information security.

Why is cyber security important?
Listed below are the reasons why cyber security is so important in what’s become a
predominant digital world:

 Cyber attacks can be extremely expensive for businesses to endure.
 In addition to financial damage suffered by the business, a data breach can also inflict

untold reputational damage.
 Cyber-attacks these days are becoming progressively destructive. Cybercriminals are

using more sophisticated ways to initiate cyber attacks.

CYBER SECURITY Page 5




 Regulations such as GDPR are forcing organizations into taking better care of the
personal data they hold.

Because of the above reasons, cyber security has become an important part of the
business and the focus now is on developing appropriate response plans that minimize
the damage in the event of a cyber attack.

But, an organization or an individual can develop a proper response plan only when
he has a good grip on cyber security fundamentals.

Cyber security Fundamentals – Confidentiality:

Confidentiality is about preventing the disclosure of data to unauthorized parties.

It also means trying to keep the identity of authorized parties involved in sharing and holding
data private and anonymous.

 Often confidentiality is compromised by cracking poorly encrypted data, Man-in-the-middle
(MITM) attacks, disclosing sensitive data.

Standard measures to establish confidentiality include:

 Data encryption
 Two-factor authentication
 Biometric verification
 Security tokens

Integrity

Integrity refers to protecting information from being modified by unauthorized parties.

Standard measures to guarantee integrity include:

 Cryptographic checksums
 Using file permissions
 Uninterrupted power supplies
 Data backups

Availability

Availability is making sure that authorized parties are able to access the information when
needed.

Standard measures to guarantee availability include:

 Backing up data to external drives
 Implementing firewalls
 Having backup power supplies
 Data redundancy

CYBER SECURITY Page 6




Types of Cyber Attacks

A cyber-attack is an exploitation of computer systems and networks. It uses malicious code to
alter computer code, logic or data and lead to cybercrimes, such as information and identity
theft.

Cyber-attacks can be classified into the following categories:

1) Web-based attacks
2) System-based attacks

Web-based attacks

These are the attacks which occur on a website or web applications. Some of the important
web-based attacks are as follows-

1. Injection attacks

It is the attack in which some data will be injected into a web application to manipulate the
application and fetch the required information.

Example- SQL Injection, code Injection, log Injection, XML Injection etc.

2. DNS Spoofing

DNS Spoofing is a type of computer security hacking. Whereby a data is introduced into a
DNS resolver's cache causing the name server to return an incorrect IP address, diverting
traffic to the attackers  computer or any other computer. The DNS spoofing attacks can go on
for a long period of time without being detected and can cause serious security issues.

3. Session Hijacking

It is a security attack on a user session over a protected network. Web applications create
cookies to store the state and user sessions. By stealing the cookies, an attacker can have
access to all of the user data.

4. Phishing

Phishing is a type of attack which attempts to steal sensitive information like user login
credentials and credit card number. It occurs when an attacker is masquerading as a
trustworthy entity in electronic communication.

5. Brute force

It is a type of attack which uses a trial and error method. This attack generates a large number
of guesses and validates them to obtain actual data like user password and personal
identification number. This attack may be used by criminals to crack encrypted data, or by
security, analysts to test an organization's network security.



CYBER SECURITY Page 7




6. Denial of Service

It is an attack which meant to make a server or network resource unavailable to the users. It
accomplishes this by flooding the target with traffic or sending it information that triggers a
crash. It uses the single system and single internet connection to attack a server. It can be
classified into the following-

Volume-based attacks- Its goal is to saturate the bandwidth of the attacked site, and is
measured in bit per second.

Protocol attacks- It consumes actual server resources, and is measured in a packet.

Application layer attacks- Its goal is to crash the web server and is measured in request per
second.

7. Dictionary attacks

This type of attack stored the list of a commonly used password and validated them to get
original password.

8. URL Interpretation

It is a type of attack where we can change the certain parts of a URL, and one can make a
web server to deliver web pages for which he is not authorized to browse.

9. File Inclusion attacks

It is a type of attack that allows an attacker to access unauthorized or essential files which is
available on the web server or to execute malicious files on the web server by making use of
the include functionality.

10. Man in the middle attacks

It is a type of attack that allows an attacker to intercepts the connection between client and
server and acts as a bridge between them. Due to this, an attacker will be able to read, insert
and modify the data in the intercepted connection.

System-based attacks

These are the attacks which are intended to compromise a computer or a computer network.
Some of the important system-based attacks are as follows-

1. Virus

It is a type of malicious software program that spread throughout the computer files without
the knowledge of a user. It is a self-replicating malicious computer program that replicates by
inserting copies of itself into other computer programs when executed. It can also execute
instructions that cause harm to the system.



CYBER SECURITY Page 8




2. Worm

It is a type of malware whose primary function is to replicate itself to spread to uninfected
computers. It works same as the computer virus. Worms often originate from email
attachments that appear to be from trusted senders.

3. Trojan horse

It is a malicious program that occurs unexpected changes to computer setting and unusual
activity, even when the computer should be idle. It misleads the user of its true intent. It
appears to be a normal application but when opened/executed some malicious code will run
in the background.

4. Backdoors

It is a method that bypasses the normal authentication process. A developer may create a
backdoor so that an application or operating system can be accessed for troubleshooting or
other purposes.

5. Bots

A bot (short for "robot") is an automated process that interacts with other network services.
Some bots program run automatically, while others only execute commands when they
receive specific input. Common examples of bots program are the crawler, chatroom bots,
and malicious bots.







CYBER SECURITY Page 9




The 7 layers of cyber security should centre on the mission critical assets you are seeking to
protect.

1: Mission Critical Assets – This is the data you need to protect
2: Data Security – Data security controls protect the storage and transfer of data.
3: Application Security – Applications security controls protect access to an application, an
application’s access to your mission critical assets, and the internal security of the
application.
4: Endpoint Security – Endpoint security controls protect the connection between devices and
the network.
5: Network Security – Network security controls protect an organization’s network and
prevent unauthorized access of the network.
6: Perimeter Security – Perimeter security controls include both the physical and digital
security methodologies that protect the business overall.
7: The Human Layer – Humans are the weakest link in any cyber security posture. Human
security controls include phishing simulations and access management controls that protect
mission critical assets from a wide variety of human threats, including cyber criminals,
malicious insiders, and negligent users.

Vulnerability, threat, Harmful acts

As the recent epidemic of data breaches illustrates, no system is immune to attacks. Any
company that manages, transmits, stores, or otherwise handles data has to institute and
enforce mechanisms to monitor their cyber environment, identify vulnerabilities, and close up
security holes as quickly as possible.
Before identifying specific dangers to modern data systems, it is crucial to understand the
distinction between cyber threats and vulnerabilities.

Cyber threats are security incidents or circumstances with the potential to have a negative
outcome for your network or other data management systems.
Examples of common types of security threats include phishing attacks that result in the
installation of malware that infects your data, failure of a staff member to follow data
protection protocols that cause a data breach, or even a tornado that takes down your
company’s data headquarters, disrupting access.

Vulnerabilities are the gaps or weaknesses in a system that make threats possible and tempt
threat actors to exploit them.

Types of vulnerabilities in network security include but are not limited to SQL injections,
server misconfigurations, cross-site scripting, and transmitting sensitive data in a non-
encrypted plain text format.
When threat probability is multiplied by the potential loss that may result, cyber security
experts, refer to this as a risk.






CYBER SECURITY Page 10





SECURITY VULNERABILITIES, THREATS AND ATTACKS –

Categories of vulnerabilities

 Corrupted (Loss of integrity)

 Leaky (Loss of confidentiality)

  Unavailable or very slow (Loss of availability)

 – Threats represent potential security harm to an asset when vulnerabilities are exploited

 - Attacks are threats that have been carried out

 Passive – Make use of information from the system without affecting system
resources

 Active – Alter system resources or affect operation

  Insider – Initiated by an entity inside the organization

 Outsider – Initiated from outside the perimeter

Computer criminals

Computer criminals have access to enormous amounts of hardware, software, and data; they
have the potential to cripple much of effective business and government throughout the
world. In a sense, the purpose of computer security is to prevent these criminals from doing
damage.

We say computer crime is any crime involving a computer or aided by the use of one.
Although this definition is admittedly broad, it allows us to consider ways to protect
ourselves, our businesses, and our communities against those who use computers maliciously.

One approach to prevention or moderation is to understand who commits these crimes and
why. Many studies have attempted to determine the characteristics of computer criminals. By
studying those who have already used computers to commit crimes, we may be able in the
future to spot likely criminals and prevent the crimes from occurring.

CIA Triad

The CIA Triad is actually a security model that has been developed to help people think
about various parts of IT security.

CIA triad broken down:

Confidentiality

It's crucial in today's world for people to protect their sensitive, private information from
unauthorized access.

Protecting confidentiality is dependent on being able to define and enforce certain access
levels for information.

CYBER SECURITY Page 11




In some cases, doing this involves separating information into various collections that are
organized by who needs access to the information and how sensitive that information actually
is - i.e. the amount of damage suffered if the confidentiality was breached.

Some of the most common means used to manage confidentiality include access control lists,
volume and file encryption, and Unix file permissions.

Integrity

Data integrity is what the "I" in CIA Triad stands for.

This is an essential component of the CIA Triad and designed to protect data from deletion or
modification from any unauthorized party, and it ensures that when an authorized person
makes a change that should not have been made the damage can be reversed.

Availability

This is the final component of the CIA Triad and refers to the actual availability of your data.
Authentication mechanisms, access channels and systems all have to work properly for the
information they protect and ensure it's available when it is needed.

Understanding the CIA triad

The CIA Triad is all about information. While this is considered the core factor of the
majority of IT security, it promotes a limited view of the security that ignores other important
factors.

For example, even though availability may serve to make sure you don't lose access to
resources needed to provide information when it is needed, thinking about information
security in itself doesn't guarantee that someone else hasn't used your hardware resources
without authorization.

It's important to understand what the CIA Triad is, how it is used to plan and also to
implement a quality security policy while understanding the various principles behind it. It's
also important to understand the limitations it presents. When you are informed, you can
utilize the CIA Triad for what it has to offer and avoid the consequences that may come along
by not understanding it.

Assets and Threat

What is an Asset: An asset is any data, device or other component of an organization’s
systems that is valuable – often because it contains sensitive data or can be used to access
such information.

For example: An employee’s desktop computer, laptop or company phone would be
considered an asset, as would applications on those devices. Likewise, critical infrastructure,
such as servers and support systems, are assets. An organization’s most common assets are
information assets. These are things such as databases and physical files – i.e. the sensitive
data that you store

CYBER SECURITY Page 12




What is a threat: A threat is any incident that could negatively affect an asset – for
example, if it’s lost, knocked offline or accessed by an unauthorized party.

Threats can be categorized as circumstances that compromise the confidentiality, integrity or
availability of an asset, and can either be intentional or accidental.

Intentional threats include things such as criminal hacking or a malicious insider stealing
information, whereas accidental threats generally involve employee error, a technical
malfunction or an event that causes physical damage, such as a fire or natural disaster.

Motive of Attackers

The categories of cyber-attackers enable us to better understand the attackers' motivations
and the actions they take. As shown in Figure, operational cyber security risks arise from
three types of actions: i) inadvertent actions (generally by insiders) that are taken without
malicious or harmful intent; ii) deliberate actions (by insiders or outsiders) that are taken
intentionally and are meant to do harm; and iii) inaction (generally by insiders), such as a
failure to act in a given situation, either because of a lack of appropriate skills, knowledge,
guidance, or availability of the correct person to take action Of primary concern here are
deliberate actions, of which there are three categories of motivation.

1. Political motivations: examples include destroying, disrupting, or taking control of
targets; espionage; and making political statements, protests, or retaliatory actions.

2. Economic motivations: examples include theft of intellectual property or other
economically valuable assets (e.g., funds, credit card information); fraud; industrial
espionage and sabotage; and blackmail.

3. Socio-cultural motivations: examples include attacks with philosophical, theological,
political, and even humanitarian goals. Socio-cultural motivations also include fun,
curiosity, and a desire for publicity or ego gratification.





Types of cyber-attacker actions and their motivations when deliberate

CYBER SECURITY Page 13




Active attacks: An active attack is a network exploit in which a hacker attempts to make
changes to data on the target or data en route to the target.

Types of Active attacks:

Masquerade: in this attack, the intruder pretends to be a particular user of a system to gain
access or to gain greater privileges than they are authorized for.  A masquerade may be
attempted through the use of stolen login IDs and passwords, through finding security gaps in
programs or through bypassing the authentication mechanism.

Session replay: In this type of attack, a hacker steals an authorized user’s log in information
by stealing the session ID. The intruder gains access and the ability to do anything the
authorized user can do on the website.

Message modification: In this attack, an intruder alters packet header addresses to direct a
message to a different destination or modify the data on a target machine.

In a denial of service (DoS) attack, users are deprived of access to a network or web
resource. This is generally accomplished by overwhelming the target with more traffic than it
can handle.

In a distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) exploit, large numbers of compromised systems
(sometimes called a botnet or zombie army) attack a single target.

Passive Attacks:Passive attacks are relatively scarce from a classification perspective, but
can be carried out with relative ease, particularly if the traffic is not encrypted.


Types of Passive attacks:

Eavesdropping (tapping): the attacker simply listens to messages exchanged by two entities.
For the attack to be useful, the traffic must not be encrypted. Any unencrypted information,
such as a password sent in response to an HTTP request, may be retrieved by the attacker.

Traffic analysis: the attacker looks at the metadata transmitted in traffic in order to deduce
information relating to the exchange and the participating entities, e.g. the form of the
exchanged traffic (rate, duration, etc.). In the cases where encrypted data are used, traffic
analysis can also lead to attacks by cryptanalysis, whereby the attacker may obtain
information or succeed in unencrypting the traffic.

Software Attacks: Malicious code (sometimes called malware) is a type of software
designed to take over or damage a computer user's operating system, without the user's
knowledge or approval. It can be very difficult to remove and very damaging. Common
malware examples are listed in the following table:



CYBER SECURITY Page 14




Attack Characteristics

Virus A virus is a program that attempts to damage a computer system and replicate itself
to other computer systems. A virus:

 Requires a host to replicate and usually attaches itself to a host file or a
hard drive sector.

 Replicates each time the host is used.
 Often focuses on destruction or corruption of data.
 Usually attaches to files with execution capabilities such as .doc, .exe, and

.bat extensions.
 Often distributes via e-mail. Many viruses can e-mail themselves to

everyone in your address book.
 Examples: Stoned, Michelangelo, Melissa, I Love You.

Worm A worm is a self-replicating program that can be designed to do any number of
things, such as delete files or send documents via e-mail. A worm can negatively
impact network traffic just in the process of replicating itself. A worm:

 Can install a backdoor in the infected computer.
 Is usually introduced into the system through a vulnerability.
 Infects one system and spreads to other systems on the network.
 Example: Code Red.

Trojan A Trojan horse is a malicious program that is disguised as legitimate software.
horse Discretionary environments are often more vulnerable and susceptible to Trojan

horse attacks because security is user focused and user directed. Thus the
compromise of a user account could lead to the compromise of the entire
environment. A Trojan horse:

 Cannot replicate itself.
 Often contains spying functions (such as a packet sniffer) or backdoor

functions that allow a computer to be remotely controlled from the
network.

 Often is hidden in useful software such as screen savers or games.
 Example: Back Orifice, Net Bus, Whack-a-Mole.

Logic A Logic Bomb is malware that lies dormant until triggered. A logic bomb is a
Bomb specific example of an asynchronous attack.

 A trigger activity may be a specific date and time, the launching of a
specific program, or the processing of a specific type of activity.

 Logic bombs do not self-replicate.







CYBER SECURITY Page 15




Hardware Attacks:

Common hardware attacks include:

 Manufacturing backdoors, for malware or other penetrative purposes; backdoors
aren’t limited to software and hardware, but they also affect embedded radio-
frequency identification (RFID) chips and memory

 Eavesdropping by gaining access to protected memory without opening other
hardware

 Inducing faults, causing the interruption of normal behaviour

 Hardware modification tampering with invasive operations

 Backdoor creation; the presence of hidden methods for bypassing normal computer
authentication systems

 Counterfeiting product assets that can produce extraordinary operations and those
made to gain malicious access to systems.

Cyber Threats-Cyber Warfare:Cyber warfare refers to the use of digital attacks -- like
computer viruses and hacking -- by one country to disrupt the vital computer systems of
another, with the aim of creating damage, death and destruction. Future wars will see
hackers using computer code to attack an enemy's infrastructure, fighting alongside
troops using conventional weapons like guns and missiles.

Cyber warfare involves the actions by a nation-state or international organization to attack
and attempt to damage another nation's computers or information networks through, for
example, computer viruses or denial-of-service attacks.

Cyber Crime:

Cybercrime is criminal activity that either targets or uses a computer, a computer network
or a networked device.Cybercrime is committed by cybercriminals or hackers who want
to make money. Cybercrime is carried out by individuals or organizations.

Some cybercriminals are organized, use advanced techniques and are highly technically
skilled. Others are novice hackers.

Cyber Terrorism:

Cyber terrorism is the convergence of cyberspace and terrorism. It refers to unlawful
attacks and threats of attacks against computers, networks and the information stored
therein when done to intimidate or coerce a government or its people in furtherance of
political or social objectives.

Examples are hacking into computer systems, introducing viruses to vulnerable
networks, web site defacing, Denial-of-service attacks, or terroristic threats made via
electronic communication.

Cyber Espionage:

Cyber spying, or cyber espionage, is the act or practice of obtaining secrets and
information without the permission and knowledge of the holder of the information from

CYBER SECURITY Page 16




individuals, competitors, rivals, groups, governments and enemies for personal,
economic, political or military advantage using methods on the Internet.





Security Policies:

Security policies are a formal set of rules which is issued by an organization to ensure that the
user who are authorized to access company technology and information assets comply with
rules and guidelines related to the security of information.

A security policy also considered to be a "living document" which means that the document
is never finished, but it is continuously updated as requirements of the technology and
employee changes.

We use security policies to manage our network security. Most types of security policies are
automatically created during the installation. We can also customize policies to suit our
specific environment.

Need of Security policies-

1) It increases efficiency.

2) It upholds discipline and accountability

3) It can make or break a business deal

4) It helps to educate employees on security literacy



CYBER SECURITY Page 17




There are some important cyber security policies recommendations describe below-

Virus and Spyware Protection policy:

 It helps to detect threads in files, to detect applications that exhibits suspicious
behavior.

 Removes, and repairs the side effects of viruses and security risks by using signatures.

Firewall Policy:

 It blocks the unauthorized users from accessing the systems and networks that connect
to the Internet.

 It detects the attacks by cybercriminals and removes the unwanted sources of network
traffic.

Intrusion Prevention policy:

 This policy automatically detects and blocks the network attacks and browser attacks.
 It also protects applications from vulnerabilities and checks the contents of one or

more data packages and detects malware which is coming through legal ways.

Application and Device Control:

 This policy protects a system's resources from applications and manages the
peripheral devices that can attach to a system.

 The device control policy applies to both Windows and Mac computers whereas
application control policy can be applied only to Windows clients.



















CYBER SECURITY Page 18




Unit II
CYBERSPACE AND THE LAW & CYBER FORENSICS



CYBERSPACE

Cyberspace can be defined as an intricate environment that involves interactions between
people, software, and services. It is maintained by the worldwide distribution of information
and communication technology devices and networks.

With the benefits carried by the technological advancements, the cyberspace today has
become a common pool used by citizens, businesses, critical information infrastructure,
military and governments in a fashion that makes it hard to induce clear boundaries among
these different groups. The cyberspace is anticipated to become even more complex in the
upcoming years, with the increase in networks and devices connected to it.



REGULATIONS

There are five predominant laws to cover when it comes to cybersecurity:

Information Technology Act, 2000 The Indian cyber laws are governed by the Information
Technology Act, penned down back in 2000. The principal impetus of this Act is to offer
reliable legal inclusiveness to eCommerce, facilitating registration of real-time records with
the Government.

But with the cyber attackers getting sneakier, topped by the human tendency to misuse
technology, a series of amendments followed.

The ITA, enacted by the Parliament of India, highlights the grievous punishments and
penalties safeguarding the e-governance, e-banking, and e-commerce sectors. Now, the scope
of ITA has been enhanced to encompass all the latest communication devices.

The IT Act is the salient one, guiding the entire Indian legislation to govern cybercrimes
rigorously:

Section 43 - Applicable to people who damage the computer systems without permission
from the owner. The owner can fully claim compensation for the entire damage in such cases.

Section 66 - Applicable in case a person is found to dishonestly or fraudulently committing
any act referred to in section 43. The imprisonment term in such instances can mount up to
three years or a fine of up to Rs. 5 lakh.

Section 66B - Incorporates the punishments for fraudulently receiving stolen communication
devices or computers, which confirms a probable three years imprisonment. This term can
also be topped by Rs. 1 lakh fine, depending upon the severity.

Section 66C - This section scrutinizes the identity thefts related to imposter digital
signatures, hacking passwords, or other distinctive identification features. If proven guilty,
imprisonment of three years might also be backed by Rs.1 lakh fine.

CYBER SECURITY Page 19




Section 66 D - This section was inserted on-demand, focusing on punishing cheaters doing
impersonation using computer resources.

Indian Penal Code (IPC) 1980

Identity thefts and associated cyber frauds are embodied in the Indian Penal Code (IPC),
1860 - invoked along with the Information Technology Act of 2000.

The primary relevant section of the IPC covers cyber frauds:

Forgery (Section 464)

Forgery pre-planned for cheating (Section 468)

False documentation (Section 465)

Presenting a forged document as genuine (Section 471)

Reputation damage (Section 469)

Companies Act of 2013

The corporate stakeholders refer to the Companies Act of 2013 as the legal obligation
necessary for the refinement of daily operations. The directives of this Act cements all the
required techno-legal compliances, putting the less compliant companies in a legal fix.

The Companies Act 2013 vested powers in the hands of the SFIO (Serious Frauds
Investigation Office) to prosecute Indian companies and their directors. Also, post the
notification of the Companies Inspection, Investment, and Inquiry Rules, 2014, SFIOs has
become even more proactive and stern in this regard.

The legislature ensured that all the regulatory compliances are well-covered, including cyber
forensics, e-discovery, and cybersecurity diligence. The Companies (Management and
Administration) Rules, 2014 prescribes strict guidelines confirming the cybersecurity
obligations and responsibilities upon the company directors and leaders.

NIST Compliance

The Cybersecurity Framework (NCFS), authorized by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), offers a harmonized approach to cybersecurity as the most reliable
global certifying body.

NIST Cybersecurity Framework encompasses all required guidelines, standards, and best
practices to manage the cyber-related risks responsibly. This framework is prioritized on
flexibility and cost-effectiveness.

 It promotes the resilience and protection of critical infrastructure by: Allowing better
interpretation, management, and reduction of cybersecurity risks – to mitigate data loss, data
misuse, and the subsequent restoration costs Determining the most important activities and
critical operations - to focus on securing them Demonstrates the trust-worthiness of
organizations who secure critical assets Helps to prioritize investments to maximize the
cybersecurity ROI Addresses regulatory and contractual obligations Supports the wider
information security program By combining the NIST CSF framework with ISO/IEC 27001 -
cybersecurity risk management becomes simplified. It also makes communication easier

CYBER SECURITY Page 20




throughout the organization and across the supply chains via a common cybersecurity
directive laid by NIST.

Final Thoughts As human dependence on technology intensifies, cyber laws in India and
across the globe need constant up-gradation and refinements. The pandemic has also pushed
much of the workforce into a remote working module increasing the need for app security.
Lawmakers have to go the extra mile to stay ahead of the impostors, in order to block them at
their advent.

Cybercrimes can be controlled but it needs collaborative efforts of the lawmakers, the
Internet or Network providers, the intercessors like banks and shopping sites, and, most
importantly, the users. Only the prudent efforts of these stakeholders, ensuring their
confinement to the law of the cyberland - can bring about online safety and resilience.

ROLE OF INTERNATIONAL LAWS

In various countries, areas of the computing and communication industries are regulated by
governmental bodies  There are specific rules on the uses to which computers and computer
networks may be put, in particular there are rules on unauthorized access, data privacy and
spamming  There are also limits on the use of encryption and of equipment which may be
used to defeat copy protection schemes  There are laws governing trade on the Internet,
taxation, consumer protection, and advertising  There are laws on censorship versus
freedom of expression, rules on public access to government information, and individual
access to information held on them by private bodies  Some states limit access to the
Internet, by law as well as by technical means.

INTERNATIONAL LAW FOR CYBER CRIME

Cybercrime is "international" that there are ‘no cyber-borders between countries’  The
complexity in types and forms of cybercrime increases the difficulty to fight back  fighting
cybercrime calls for international cooperation  Various organizations and governments have
already made joint efforts in establishing global standards of legislation and law enforcement
both on a regional and on an international scale

THE INDIAN CYBERSPACE

Indian cyberspace was born in 1975 with the establishment of National Informatics Centre

(NIC) with an aim to provide govt with IT solutions. Three networks (NWs) were set up

between 1986 and 1988 to connect various agencies of govt. These NWs were, INDONET

which connected the IBM mainframe installations that made up India’s computer

infrastructure, NICNET (the NIC NW) a nationwide very small aperture terminal (VSAT)

NW for public sector organisations as well as to connect the central govt with the state govts

and district administrations, the third NW setup was ERNET (the Education and Research

Network), to serve the academic and research communities.

New Internet Policy of 1998 paved the way for services from multiple Internet service

providers (ISPs) and gave boost to the Internet user base grow from 1.4 million in 1999 to

over 150 million by Dec 2012. Exponential growth rate is attributed to increasing Internet

CYBER SECURITY Page 21




access through mobile phones and tablets. Govt is making a determined push to increase

broadband penetration from its present level of about 6%1. The target for broadband is 160

million households by 2016 under the National Broadband Plan.

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY POLICY

National Cyber Security Policy is a policy framework by Department of Electronics and
Information Technology. It aims at protecting the public and private infrastructure from
cyberattacks. The policy also intends to safeguard "information, such as personal information
(of web users), financial and banking information and sovereign data". This was particularly
relevant in the wake of US National Security Agency (NSA) leaks that suggested the US
government agencies are spying on Indian users, who have no legal or technical safeguards
against it. Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(India) defines Cyberspace as a complex environment consisting of interactions between
people, software services supported by worldwide distribution of information and
communication technology.

VISION

To build a secure and resilient cyberspace for citizens, business, and government and also to
protect anyone from intervening in user's privacy.

MISSION

To protect information and information infrastructure in cyberspace, build capabilities to
prevent and respond to cyber threat, reduce vulnerabilities and minimize damage from cyber
incidents through a combination of institutional structures, people, processes, technology, and
cooperation.

OBJECTIVE

Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (India) define objectives as
follows:

 To create a secure cyber ecosystem in the country, generate adequate trust and
confidence in IT system and transactions in cyberspace and thereby enhance adoption
of IT in all sectors of the economy.

 To create an assurance framework for the design of security policies and promotion
and enabling actions for compliance to global security standards and best practices by
way of conformity assessment (Product, process, technology & people).

 To strengthen the Regulatory Framework for ensuring a SECURE CYBERSPACE
ECOSYSTEM.

 To enhance and create National and Sectoral level 24X7 mechanism for obtaining
strategic information regarding threats to ICT infrastructure, creating scenarios for
response, resolution and crisis management through effective predictive, preventive,
protective response and recovery actions.









CYBER SECURITY Page 22




INTRODUCTION: CYBER FORENSICS

CYBER FORENSICS:

Computer forensics is the application of investigation and analysis techniques to gather and
preserve evidence.

Forensic examiners typically analyze data from personal computers, laptops, personal digital
assistants, cell phones, servers, tapes, and any other type of media. This process can involve
anything from breaking encryption, to executing search warrants with a law enforcement
team, to recovering and analyzing files from hard drives that will be critical evidence in the
most serious civil and criminal cases.

The forensic examination of computers, and data storage media, is a complicated and highly
specialized process. The results of forensic examinations are compiled and included in
reports. In many cases, examiners testify to their findings, where their skills and abilities are
put to ultimate scrutiny.


DIGITAL FORENSICS:

Digital Forensics is defined as the process of preservation, identification, extraction, and
documentation of computer evidence which can be used by the court of law. It is a science of
finding evidence from digital media like a computer, mobile phone, server, or network. It
provides the forensic team with the best techniques and tools to solve complicated digital-
related cases.

Digital Forensics helps the forensic team to analyzes, inspect, identifies, and preserve the
digital evidence residing on various types of electronic devices.

Digital forensic science is a branch of forensic science that focuses on the recovery and
investigation of material found in digital devices related to cybercrime.

THE NEED FOR COMPUTER FORENSICS

Computer forensics is also important because it can save your organization money. ... From a
technical standpoint, the main goal of computer forensics is to identify, collect, preserve, and
analyze data in a way that preserves the integrity of the evidence collected so it can be used
effectively in a legal case.

CYBER FORENSICS AND DIGITAL EVIDENCE:

Digital evidence is information stored or transmitted in binary form that may be relied on in
court. It can be found on a computer hard drive, a mobile phone, among other places. Digital
evidence is commonly associated with electronic crime, or e-crime, such as child
pornography or credit card fraud. However, digital evidence is now used to prosecute all
types of crimes, not just e-crime. For example, suspects' e-mail or mobile phone files might
contain critical evidence regarding their intent, their whereabouts at the time of a crime and
their relationship with other suspects. In 2005, for example, a floppy disk led investigators to
the BTK serial killer who had eluded police capture since 1974 and claimed the lives of at
least 10 victims.

CYBER SECURITY Page 23




In an effort to fight e-crime and to collect relevant digital evidence for all crimes, law
enforcement agencies are incorporating the collection and analysis of digital evidence, also
known as computer forensics, into their infrastructure. Law enforcement agencies are
challenged by the need to train officers to collect digital evidence and keep up with rapidly
evolving technologies such as computer operating systems.




FORENSICS ANALYSIS OF EMAIL:

E-mail forensics refers to the study of source and content of e-mail as evidence to identify the
actual sender and recipient of a message, data/time of transmission, detailed record of e-mail
transaction, intent of the sender, etc. This study involves investigation of metadata, keyword
searching, port scanning, etc. for authorship attribution and identification of e-mail scams.

Various approaches that are used for e-mail forensic are:

 Header Analysis – Meta data in the e-mail message in the form of control
information i.e. envelope and headers including headers in the message body contain
information about the sender and/or the path along which the message has traversed.
Some of these may be spoofed to conceal the identity of the sender. A detailed
analysis of these headers and their correlation is performed in header analysis.


 Bait Tactics – In bait tactic investigation an e-mail with http: “<imgsrc>” tag having
image source at some computer monitored by the investigators is send to the sender of
e-mail under investigation containing real (genuine) e-mail address. When the e-mail
is opened, a log entry containing the IP address of the recipient (sender of the e-mail
under investigation) is recorded on the http server hosting the image and thus sender
is tracked. However, if the recipient (sender of the e-mail under investigation) is using
a proxy server then IP address of the proxy server is recorded. The log on proxy
server can be used to track the sender of the e-mail under investigation. If the proxy
server’s log is unavailable due to some reason, then investigators may send the tactic
e-mail containing a) Embedded Java Applet that runs on receiver’s computer or b)
HTML page with Active X Object. Both aiming to extract IP address of the receiver’s
computer and e-mail it to the investigators.


 Server Investigation – In this investigation, copies of delivered e-mails and server
logs are investigated to identify source of an e-mail message. E-mails purged from the
clients (senders or receivers) whose recovery is impossible may be requested from
servers (Proxy or ISP) as most of them store a copy of all e-mails after their
deliveries. Further, logs maintained by servers can be studied to trace the address of
the computer responsible for making the e-mail transaction. However, servers store
the copies of e-mail and server logs only for some limited periods and some may not
co-operate with the investigators. Further, SMTP servers which store data like credit
card number and other data pertaining to owner of a mailbox can be used to identify
person behind an e-mail address.


 Network Device Investigation – In this form of e-mail investigation, logs maintained
by the network devices such as routers, firewalls and switches are used to investigate

CYBER SECURITY Page 24




the source of an e-mail message. This form of investigation is complex and is used
only when the logs of servers (Proxy or ISP) are unavailable due to some reason, e.g.
when ISP or proxy does not maintain a log or lack of co-operation by ISP’s or failure
to maintain chain of evidence.


 Software Embedded Identifiers – Some information about the creator of e-mail,
attached files or documents may be included with the message by the e-mail software
used by the sender for composing e-mail. This information may be included in the
form of custom headers or in the form of MIME content as a Transport Neutral
Encapsulation Format (TNEF). Investigating the e-mail for these details may reveal
some vital information about the senders e-mail preferences and options that could
help client side evidence gathering. The investigation can reveal PST file names,
Windows logon username, MAC address, etc. of the client computer used to send e-
mail message.


 Sender Mailer Fingerprints – Identification of software handling e-mail at server
can be revealed from the Received header field and identification of software
handling e-mail at client can be ascertained by using different set of headers like “X-
Mailer” or equivalent. These headers describe applications and their versions used at
the clients to send e-mail. This information about the client computer of the sender
can be used to help investigators devise an effective plan and thus prove to be very
useful.

EMAIL FORENSICS TOOLS

Erasing or deleting an email doesn’t necessarily mean that it is gone forever. Often emails
can be forensically extracted even after deletion. Forensic tracing of e-mail is similar to
traditional detective work. It is used for retrieving information from mailbox files.

 MiTec Mail Viewer – This is a viewer for Outlook Express, Windows
Mail/Windows Live Mail, Mozilla Thunderbird message databases, and single EML
files. It displays a list of contained messages with all needed properties, like an
ordinary e-mail client. Messages can be viewed in detailed view, including
attachments and an HTML preview. It has powerful searching and filtering capability
and also allows extracting email addresses from all emails in opened folder to list by
one click. Selected messages can be saved to eml files with or without their
attachments. Attachments can be extracted from selected messages by one command.


 OST and PST Viewer – Nucleus Technologies’ OST and PST viewer tools help you
view OST and PST files easily without connecting to an MS Exchange server. These
tools allow the user to scan OST and PST files and they display the data saved in it
including email messages, contacts, calendars, notes, etc., in a proper folder structure.


 eMailTrackerPro – eMailTrackerPro analyses the headers of an e-mail to detect the
IP address of the machine that sent the message so that the sender can be tracked
down. It can trace multiple e-mails at the same time and easily keep track of them.
The geographical location of an IP address is key information for determining the
threat level or validity of an e-mail message.


CYBER SECURITY Page 25




 EmailTracer – EmailTracer is an Indian effort in cyber forensics by the Resource
Centre for Cyber Forensics (RCCF) which is a premier centre for cyber forensics in
India. It develops cyber forensic tools based on the requirements of law enforcement
agencies.







DIGITAL FORENSICS LIFECYCLE:





Collection:  The first step in the forensic process is to identify potential sources of data and
acquire data from them.

Examination:After data has been collected, the next phase is to examine the data, which
involves assessing and extracting the relevant pieces of information from the collected data.
This phase may also involve bypassing or mitigating OS or application features that obscure
data and code, such as data compression, encryption, and access control mechanisms.

Analysis:  Once the relevant information has been extracted, the analyst should study and
analyze the data to draw conclusions from it. The foundation of forensics is using a
methodical approach to reach appropriate conclusions based on the available data or
determine that no conclusion can yet be drawn.

Reporting: The process of preparing and presenting the information resulting from the
analysis phase. Many factors affect reporting, including the following:

a. Alternative Explanations:When the information regarding an event is incomplete, it
may not be possible to arrive at a definitive explanation of what happened. When an
event has two or more plausible explanations, each should be given due consideration
in the reporting process. Analysts should use a methodical approach to attempt to
prove or disprove each possible explanation that is proposed.


b. Audience Consideration. Knowing the audience to which the data or information
will be shown is important.


CYBER SECURITY Page 26




c. Actionable Information. Reporting also includes identifying actionable information
gained from data that may allow an analyst to collect new sources of information

FORENSICS INVESTIGATION:

Forensics are the scientific methods used to solve a crime. Forensic investigation is the
gathering and analysis of all crime-related physical evidence in order to come to a conclusion
about a suspect. Investigators will look at blood, fluid, or fingerprints, residue, hard drives,
computers, or other technology to establish how a crime took place. This is a general
definition, though, since there are a number of different types of forensics.

TYPES OF FORENSICS INVESTIGATION

 Forensic Accounting / Auditing
 Computer or Cyber Forensics
 Crime Scene Forensics
 Forensic Archaeology
 Forensic Dentistry
 Forensic Entomology
 Forensic Graphology
 Forensic Pathology
 Forensic Psychology
 Forensic Science
 Forensic Toxicology


CHALLENGES IN COMPUTER FORENSICS

Digital forensics has been defined as the use of scientifically derived and proven methods
towards the identification, collection, preservation, validation, analysis, interpretation, and
presentation of digital evidence derivative from digital sources to facilitate the reconstruction
of events found to be criminal.But these digital forensics investigation methods face some
major challenges at the time of practical implementation. Digital forensic challenges are
categorized into three major heads as per Fahdi, Clark, and Furnell are:

 Technical challenges
 Legal challenges
 Resource Challenges

TECHNICAL CHALLENGES

As technology develops crimes and criminals are also developed with it. Digital forensic
experts use forensic tools for collecting shreds of evidence against criminals and criminals
use such tools for hiding, altering or removing the traces of their crime, in digital forensic this
process is called Anti- forensics technique which is considered as a major challenge in digital
forensics world.

Anti-forensics techniquesare categorized into the following types:

S. No. Type Description
1 Encryption It is legitimately used for ensuring the privacy of

CYBER SECURITY Page 27




information by keeping it hidden from an
unauthorized user/person. Unfortunately, it can also
be used by criminals to hide their crimes

2 Data hiding in storage space Criminals usually hide chunks of data inside the
storage medium in invisible form by using system
commands, and programs.

3 Covert Channel A covert channel is a communication protocol
which allows an attacker to bypass intrusion
detection technique and hide data over the network.
The attacker used it for hiding the connection
between him and the compromised system.

Other Technical challenges are:

 Operating in the cloud
 Time to archive data
 Skill gap
 Steganography

LEGAL CHALLENGES

The presentation of digital evidence is more difficult than its collection because there are
many instances where the legal framework acquires a soft approach and does not recognize
every aspect of cyber forensics, as in Jagdeo Singh V. The State and Ors case Hon’ble High
Court of Delhi held that “while dealing with the admissibility of an intercepted telephone call
in a CD and CDR which was without a certificate under Sec. 65B of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 the court observed that the secondary electronic evidence without certificate u/s. 65B of
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is not admissible and cannot be looked into by the court for any
purpose whatsoever.” This happens in most of the cases as the cyber police lack the
necessary qualification and ability to identify a possible source of evidence and prove it.
Besides, most of the time electronic evidence is challenged in the court due to its integrity. In
the absence of proper guidelines and the nonexistence of proper explanation of the collection,
and acquisition of electronic evidence gets dismissed in itself.

Legal Challenges

S.No. Type Description
1 Absence of guidelines and In India, there are no proper guidelines for the

standards collection and acquisition of digital evidence. The
investigating agencies and forensic laboratories are
working on the guidelines of their own. Due to this,
the potential of digital evidence has been destroyed.

2 Limitation of the Indian The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 have limited
Evidence Act, 1872 approach, it is not able to evolve with the time and

address the E-evidence are more susceptible to
tampering, alteration, transposition, etc. the Act is
silent on the method of collection of e-evidence it
only focuses on the presentation of electronic
evidence in the court by accompanying a certificate
as per subsection 4 of Sec. 65B[12]. This means no

CYBER SECURITY Page 28




matter what procedure is followed it must be proved
with the help of a certificate.



Other Legal Challenges

 Privacy Issues
 Admissibility in Courts
 Preservation of electronic evidence
 Power for gathering digital evidence
 Analyzing a running computer

Resource Challenges

As the rate of crime increases the number of data increases and the burden to analyze such
huge data is also increasing on a digital forensic expert because digital evidence is more
sensitive as compared to physical evidence it can easily disappear. For making the
investigation process fast and useful forensic experts use various tools to check the
authenticity of the data but dealing with these tools is also a challenge in itself.

Types of Resource Challenges are:

 Change in technology

Due to rapid change in technology like operating systems, application software and hardware,
reading of digital evidence becoming more difficult because new version software’s are not
supported to an older version and the software developing companies did provide any
backward compatible’s which also affects legally.

 Volume and replication

The confidentiality, availability, and integrity of electronic documents are easily get
manipulated.  The combination of wide-area networks and the internet form a big network
that allows flowing data beyond the physical boundaries. Such easiness of communication
and availability of electronic document increases the volume of data which also create
difficulty in the identification of original and relevant data.















CYBER SECURITY Page 29




Unit 3
CYBERCRIMES: MOBILE AND WIRELESS

INTRODUCTION. Why should mobile devices be protected? Every day, mobile devices are
lost, stolen, and infected. Mobile devices can store important business and
personal information, and are often be used to access University systems, email, banking



Proliferation of mobile and wireless devices:
 people hunched over their smartphones or tablets in cafes, airports, supermarkets

and even at bus stops, seemingly oblivious to anything or anyone around them.

 They play games, download email, go shopping or check their bank balances on the
go.

They might even access corporate networks and pull up a document or two on their mobile
gadgets
Today, incredible advances are being made for mobile devices. The trend is for smaller
devices and more processing power. A few years ago, the choice was between a wireless
phone and a simple PDA. Now the buyers have a choice between high-end PDAs with
integrated wireless modems and small phones with wireless Web-browsing capabilities. A
long list of options is available to the mobile users. A simple hand-held mobile device
provides enough computing power to run small applications, play games and music, and
make voice calls. A key driver for the growth of mobile technology is the rapid growth of
business solutions into hand-held devices.
As the term "mobile device" includes many products. We first provide a clear distinction
among the key terms: mobile computing, wireless computing and hand-held devices. Figure
below helps us understand how these terms are related. Let us understand the concept of
mobile computing and the various types of devices.





Mobile computing is "taking a computer and all necessary files and software out into the
field." Many types of mobile computers have been introduced since 1990s. They are as
follows:

1. Portable computer: It is a general-purpose computer that can be easily moved from one
place to another, but cannot be used while in transit, usually because it requires some
"setting-up" and an AC power source.

CYBER SECURITY Page 30




2. Tablet PC: It lacks a keyboard, is shaped like a slate or a paper notebook and has features
of a touchscreen with a stylus and handwriting recognition software. Tablets may not be best
suited for applications requiring a physical keyboard for typing, but are otherwise capable of
carrying out most tasks that an ordinary laptop would be able to perform.

3. Internet tablet: It is the Internet appliance in tablet form. Unlike a Tablet PC, the Internet
tablet does not have much computing power and its applications suite is limited. Also it
cannot replace a general-purpose computer. The Internet tablets typically feature an MP3 and
video player, a Web browser, a chat application and a picture viewer.

4. Personal digital assistant (PDA): It is a small, usually pocket-sized, computer with
limited functionality. It is intended to supplement and synchronize with a desktop computer,
giving access to contacts, address book, notes, E-Mail and other features.

5. Ultramobile (PC): It is a full-featured, PDA-sized computer running a general-purpose
operating system (OS).

6. Smartphone: It is a PDA with an integrated cell phone functionality. Current Smartphones
have a wide range of features and installable applications.

7. Carputer: It is a computing device installed in an automobile. It operates as a wireless
computer, sound system, global positioning system (GPS) and DVD player. It also contains
word processing software and is Bluetooth compatible.

8. Fly Fusion Pentop computer: It is a computing device with the size and shape of a pen. It
functions as a writing utensil, MP3 player, language translator, digital storage device and
calculator.

Trends in Mobility:

Mobile computing is moving into a new era, third generation ( 3G), which promises greater
variety in applications and have highly improved usability as well as speedier networking.
"iPhone" from Apple and Google-led "Android" phones are the best examples of this trend
and there are plenty of other developments that point in this direction. This smart mobile
technology is rapidly gaining popularity and the attackers (hackers and crackers) are among
its biggest fans.

It is worth noting the trends in mobile computing; this will help readers to readers to realize
the seriousness of cybersecurity issues in the mobile computing domain. Figure below shows
the different types of mobility and their implications.

CYBER SECURITY Page 31






The new technology 3G networks are not entirely built with IP data security. Moreover, IP
data world when compared to voice-centric security threats is new to mobile operators. There
are numerous attacks that can be committed against mobile networks and they can originate
from two primary vectors. One is from outside the mobile network - that is, public Internet,
private networks and other operator's networks - and the other is within the mobile networks-
that is, devices such as data-capable handsets and Smartphones, notebook computers or even
desktop computers connected to the 3G network.

Popular types of attacks against 3G mobile networks are as follows:

1. Malwares, viruses and worms: Although many users are still in the transient process of
switching from 2G,2.5G2G,2.5G to 3G,3G, it is a growing need to educate the community
people and provide awareness of such threats that exist while using mobile devices. Here are
few examples of malware(s) specific to mobile devices:

 Skull Trojan: I targets Series 60 phones equipped with the Symbian mobile OS.
 Cabir Worm: It is the first dedicated mobile-phone worm infects phones running on

Symbian OS and scans other mobile devices to send a copy of itself to the first
vulnerable phone it finds through Bluetooth Wireless technology. The worst thing
about this worm is that the source code for the Cabir-H and Cabir-I viruses is
available online.

 Mosquito Trojan: It affects the Series 60 Smartphones and is a cracked version of
"Mosquitos" mobile phone game.

 Brador Trojan: It affects the Windows CE OS by creating a svchost. exe file in the
Windows start-up folder which allows full control of the device. This executable file
is conductive to traditional worm propagation vector such as E-Mail file attachments.

 Lasco Worm: It was released first in 2005 to target PDAs and mobile phones running
the Symbian OS. Lasco is based on Cabir's source code and replicates over Bluetooth
connection.

2. Denial-of-service (DoS): The main objective behind this attack is to make the system
unavailable to the intended users. Virus attacks can be used to damage the system to make the
system unavailable. Presently, one of the most common cyber security threats to wired
Internet service providers (iSPs) is a distributed denial-of-service (DDos) attack .DDoS

CYBER SECURITY Page 32




attacks are used to flood the target system with the data so that the response from the target
system is either slowed or stopped.
3. Overbilling attack: Overbilling involves an attacker hijacking a subscriber's IP address
and then using it (i.e., the connection) to initiate downloads that are not "Free downloads" or
simply use it for his/her own purposes. In either case, the legitimate user is charged for the
activity which the user did not conduct or authorize to conduct.
4. Spoofed policy development process (PDP): These of attacks exploit the vulnerabilities
in the GTP [General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) Tunneling Protocol].
5. Signaling-level attacks: The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) is a signaling protocol used
in IP multimedia subsystem (IMS) networks to provide Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
services. There are several vulnerabilities with SIP-based VolP systems.

Credit Card Frauds in Mobile and Wireless Computing Era:
These are new trends in cybercrime that are coming up with mobile computing - mobile
commerce (M-Commerce) and mobile banking (M-Banking). Credit card frauds are now
becoming commonplace given the ever-increasing power and the ever-reducing prices of the
mobile hand-held devices, factors that result in easy availability of these gadgets to almost
anyone. Today belongs to "mobile compüting," that is, anywhere anytime computing. The
developments in wireless technology have fuelled this new mode of working for white collar
workers. This is true for credit card processing too; wireless credit card processing is a
relatively new service that will allow a person to process credit cards electronically, virtually
anywhere. Wireless credit card processing is a very desirable system, because it allows
businesses to process transactions from mobile locations quickly, efficiently and
professionally. It is most often used by businesses that operate mainly in a mobile
environment



There is a system available from an Australian company "Alacrity" called closed-loop
environment for for wireless (CLEW). Figure above shows the flow of events with CLEW
which is a registered trademark of Alacrity used here only to demonstrate the flow in this
environment.



As shown in Figure, the basic flow is as follows:
1. Merchant sends a transaction to bank
2. The bank transmits the request to the authorized cardholder
3. The cardholder approves or rejects (password protected)

CYBER SECURITY Page 33




4. The bank/merchant is notified
5. The credit card transaction is completed.

Security Challenges Posed by Mobile Devices:
Mobility brings two main challenges to cybersecurity: first, on the hand-held devices,
information is being taken outside the physically controlled environment and second remote
access back to the protected environment is being granted. Perceptions of the organizations to
these cybersecurity challenges are important in devising appropriate security operating
procedure. When people are asked about important in managing a diverse range of mobile
devices, they seem to be thinking of the ones shown in below figure.
As the number of mobile device users increases, two challenges are presented: one at the
device level called "micro challenges" and another at the organizational level called "macro-
challenges."
Some well-known technical challenges in mobile security are: managing the registry settings
and configurations, authentication service security, cryptography security, Lightweight
Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) security, remote access server (RAS) security, media
player control security, networking application program interface (API), security etc.



Registry Settings for Mobile Devices:
Let us understand the issue of registry settings on mobile devices through an example:
Microsoft Activesync is meant for synchronization with Windows-powered personal
computers (PCs) and Microsoft Outlook. ActiveSync acts as the "gateway between
Windows-powered PC and Windows mobile-powered device, enabling the transfer of
applications such as Outlook information, Microsoft Office documents, pictures, music,
videos and applications from a user's desktop to his/her device.
In addition to synchronizing with a PC, ActiveSync can synchronize directly with the
Microsoft exchange server so that the users can keep their E-Mails, calendar, notes and
contacts updated wirelessly when they are away from their PCs. In this context, registry
setting becomes an important issue given the ease with which various applications allow a
free flow of information.


Authentication Service Security:
There are two components of security in mobile computing: security of devices and security
in networks. A secure network access involves authentication between the device and the
base stations or Web servers. This is to ensure that only authenticated devices can be

CYBER SECURITY Page 34




connected to the network for obtaining the requested services. No Malicious Code can
impersonate the service provider to trick the device into doing something it does not mean to.
Thus, the networks also play a crucial role in security of mobile devices.
Some eminent kinds of attacks to which mobile devices are subjected to are: push attacks,
pull attacks and crash attacks.
Authentication services security is important given the typical attacks on mobile devices
through wireless networks: Dos attacks, traffic analysis, eavesdropping, man-in-the-middle
attacks and session hijacking. Security measures in this scenario come from Wireless
Application Protocols (WAPs), use of VPNs, media access control (MAC) address filtering
and development in 802.xx standards.

Attacks on Mobile-Cell Phones:

 Mobile Phone Theft:
Mobile phones have become an integral part of everbody's life and the mobile phone has
transformed from being a luxury to a bare necessity. Increase in the purchasing power and
availability of numerous low cost handsets have also lead to an increase in mobile phone
users. Theft of mobile phones has risen dramatically over the past few years. Since huge
section of working population in India use public transport, major locations where theft
occurs are bus stops, railway stations and traffic signals.
The following factors contribute for outbreaks on mobile devices:

1. Enough target terminals: The first Palm OS virus was seen after the number of Palm
OS devices reached 15 million. The first instance of a mobile virus was observed during
June 2004 when it was discovered that an organization "Ojam" had engineered an
antipiracy Trojan virus in older versions of their mobile phone game known as Mosquito.
This virus sent SMS text messages to the organization without the users' knowledge.

2. Enough functionality: Mobile devices are increasingly being equipped with office
functionality and already carry critical data and applications, which are often protected
insufficiently or not at all. The expanded functionality also increases the probability of
malware.

3. Enough connectivity: Smartphones offer multiple communication options, such as
SMS, MMS, synchronization, Bluetooth, infrared (IR) and WLAN connections.
Therefore, unfortunately, the increased amount of freedom also offers more choices for
virus writers.


 Mobile - Viruses

  Concept of Mishing

  Concept of Vishing

 Concept of Smishing

 Hacking - Bluetooth

Organizational security Policies and Measures in Mobile Computing Era:
Proliferation of hand-held devices used makes the cybersecurity issue graver than what we
would tend to think. People have grown so used to their hand-helds they are treating them
like wallets! For example, people are storing more types of confidential information on
mobile computing devices than their employers or they themselves know; they listen to music
using their-hand-held devices.One should think about not to keep credit card and bank

CYBER SECURITY Page 35




account numbers, passwords, confidential E-Mails and strategic information about
organization, merger or takeover plans and also other valuable information that could impact
stock values in the mobile devices. Imagine the business impact if an employee's USB,
pluggable drive or laptop was lost or stolen, revealing sensitive customer data such as credit
reports, social security numbers (SSNs) and contact information.

Operating Guidelines for Implementing Mobile Device Security Policies
In situations such as those described above, the ideal solution would be to prohibit all
confidential data from being stored on mobile devices, but this may not always be practical.
Organizations can, however, reduce the risk that confidential information will be accessed
from lost or stolen mobile devices through the following steps:

1. Determine whether the employees in the organization need to use mobile computing
devices at all, based on their risks and benefits within the organization, industry and
regulatory environment.

2. Implement additional security technologies, as appropriate to fit both the organization
and the types of devices used. Most (and perhaps all) mobile computing devices will
need to have their native security augmented with such tools as strong encryption,
device passwords and physical locks. Biometrics techniques can be used for
authentication and encryption and have great potential to eliminate the challenges
associated with passwords.

3. Standardize the mobile computing devices and the associated security tools being
used with them. As a matter of fundamental principle, security deteriorates quickly as
the tools and devices used become increasingly disparate.

4. Develop a specific framework for using mobile computing devices, including
guidelines for data syncing, the use of firewalls and anti-malware software and the
types of information that can be stored on them.

5. Centralize management of your mobile computing devices. Maintain an inventory so
that you know who is using what kinds of devices.,

6. Establish patching procedures for software on mobile devices. This can often be
simplified by integrating patching with syncing or patch management with the
centralized

7. Provide education and awareness training to personnel using mobile devices. People
cannot be expected to appropriately secure their information if they have not been told
how.

Organizational Policies for the Use of Mobile Hand-Held Devices
There are many ways to handle the matter of creating policy for mobile devices. One way is
creating distinct mobile computing policy. Another way is including such devices existing
policy. There are also approaches in between where mobile devices fall under both existing
policies and a new one.In the hybrid approach, a new policy is created to address the specific
needs of the mobile devices but more general usage issues fall under general IT policies. As a
part of this approach, the "acceptable use" policy for other technologies is extended to the
mobile devices.
Companies new to mobile devices may adopt an umbrella mobile policy but they find over
time the the they will need to modify their policies to match the challenges posed by different
kinds of mobile hand-held devices. For example, wireless devices pose different challenges
than non-wireless Also, employees who use mobile devices more than 20%% of the time will
have different requirements than less-frequent users. It may happen that over time, companies
may need to create separate policies for the mobile devices on the basis of whether they
connect wirelessly and with distinctions for devices that connect to WANs and LANs .


CYBER SECURITY Page 36




Concept of Laptops:
As the price of computing technology is steadily decreasing, usage of devices such as the
laptops is becoming more common. Although laptops, like other mobile devices, enhance the
business functions owing to their mobile access to information anytime and anywhere, they
also pose a large threat as they are portable Wireless capability in these devices has also
raised cyber security concerns owing to the information being transmitted over other, which
makes it hard to detect.
The thefts of laptops have always been a major issue, according to the cybersecurity industry
and insurance company statistics. Cybercriminals are targeting laptops that are expensive, to
enable them to fetch a quick profit in the black market. Very few laptop. thieves. are actually
interested in the information that is contained in the laptop. Most laptops contain personal
and corporate information that could be sensitive..

Physical Security Countermeasures
Organizations are heavily dependent upon a mobile workforce with access to information, no
matter where they travel. However, this mobility is putting organizations at risk of having a
data breach if a laptop containing sensitive information is lost or stolen. Hence, physical
security countermeasures are becoming very vital to protect the information on the employees
laptops and to reduce the likelihood that employees will lose laptops.

1. Cables and hardwired locks: The most cost-efficient and ideal solution to safeguard any
mobile device is securing with cables and locks, specially designed for laptops. Kensington
cables are one of the most popular brands in laptop security cable. These cables are made of
aircraft-grade steel and Kevlar brand fiber, thus making these cables 40%% stronger than any
other conventional security cables. One end of the security cable is fit into the universal
security slot of the laptop and the other end is locked around any fixed furniture or item, thus
making a loop. These cables come with a variety of options such as number locks, key locks
and alarms.

2. Laptop safes: Safes made of polycarbonate - the same material that is used in bulletproof
windows, police riot shields and bank security screens-can be used to carry and safeguard the
laptops. The advantage of safes over security cables is that they protect the whole laptop and
its devices such as CD-ROM bays, PCMCIA cards and HDD bays which can be easily
removed in the case of laptops protected by security cables.

3. Motion sensors and alarms: Even though alarms and motion sensors are annoying owing
to their false alarms and loud sound level, these devices are very efficient in securing laptops.
Once these devices are activated, they can be used to track missing laptops in crowded
places. Also owing to their loud nature, they help in deterring thieves. Modern systems for
laptops are designed wherein the alarm device attached to the laptop transmits radio signals to
a certain range around the laptop.

4. Warning labels and stamps: Warning labels containing tracking information and
identification details can be fixed onto the laptop to deter aspiring thieves. These labels
cannot be removed easily and are a low-cost solution to a laptop theft. These labels have an
identification number that is stored in a universal database for verification, which, in turn
makes the resale of stolen laptops a difficult process. Such labels are highly recommended for
the laptops issued to top executives and/or key employees of the organizations.

5. Other measures for protecting laptops are as follows:
 Engraving the laptop with personal details
 Keeping the laptop close to oneself wherever possible

CYBER SECURITY Page 37




 Carrying the laptop in a different and unobvious bag making it unobvious to potential
thieves

 Creating the awareness among the employees to understand the responsibility of
carrying a laptop and also about the sensitivity of the information contained in the
laptop

 Making a copy of the purchase receipt, laptop serial number and the description of the
laptop

 Installing encryption software to protect information stored on the laptop
 Using personal firewall software to block unwanted access and intrusion
 Updating the antivirus software regularly
 Tight office security using security guards and securing the laptop by locking it down

in lockers when not in use
 Never leaving the laptop unattended in public places such as the car, parking lot,

conventions, conferences and the airport until it is fitted with an anti theft device;
 Disabling IR ports and wireless cards and removing PCMCIA cards when not in use.

Information systems security also contains logical access controls. This is because,
information, be it corporate or private, needs high security as it is the most important asset of
an organization or an individual. A few logical or access controls are as follows:

1. Protecting from malicious programs/attackers/social engineering.
2. Avoiding weak passwords/ access.
3. Monitoring application security and scanning for vulnerabilities.
4. Ensuring that unencrypted data/unprotected file systems do not pose threats.
5. Proper handing of removable drives/storage mediums /unnecessary ports.
6. Password protection through appropriate passwords rules and use of strong

passwords.
7. Locking down unwanted ports/devices.
8. Regularly installing security patches and updates.
9. Installing antivirus software/firewalls / intrusion detection system (IDSs).
10. Encrypting critical file systems.



CYBER SECURITY Page 38







Introduction to Cyber Security

(FCS)





























Uttarakhand Open University, Haldwani- 263139
Toll Free Number: 18001804025

Email: info@uou.ac.in
http://uou.ac.in







Title Introduction to Cyber Security
Author Dr. Jeetendra Pande, Assistant Professor-

School of CS & IT, Uttarakhand Open
University, Haldwani

ISBN: 978-93-84813-96-3

 Uttarakhand Open University, 2017
© Uttarakhand Open University, 2017. This work by Uttarakhand Open University is licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.  It is attributed to the sources
marked in the References, Article Sources and Contributors section.
Published By: Uttarakhand Open University































3




Index

1.1 INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................... 8

1.1.1 HISTORY OF INTERNET ..................................................................................................................................... 8

1.1.1.1 Internet Addresses ........................................................................................................................... 10

1.1.1.2 DNS .................................................................................................................................................. 12

1.1.1.3 Internet Infrastructure ..................................................................................................................... 13

1.1.1.4 World Wide Web ............................................................................................................................. 14

1.2 INTRODUCTION TO CYBER CRIME ............................................................................................................. 15

1.2.1 CLASSIFICATION OF CYBER CRIMES ................................................................................................................... 16

1.2.2 REASONS FOR COMMISSION OF CYBER CRIMES .................................................................................................. 18

1.3 MALWARE AND ITS TYPE .......................................................................................................................... 19

1.3.1 ADWARE ..................................................................................................................................................... 19

1.3.2 SPYWARE .................................................................................................................................................... 19

1.3.3 BROWSER HIJACKING SOFTWARE ...................................................................................................................... 19

1.3.4 VIRUS ......................................................................................................................................................... 19

1.3.5 WORMS ..................................................................................................................................................... 20

1.3.6 TROJAN HORSE ............................................................................................................................................ 20

1.3.7 SCAREWARE ................................................................................................................................................ 21

1.4 KINDS OF CYBER CRIME ............................................................................................................................ 21

1.4.1 CYBER STALKING .......................................................................................................................................... 21

1.4.2 CHILD PORNOGRAPHY ................................................................................................................................... 22

1.4.3 FORGERY AND COUNTERFEITING ...................................................................................................................... 22

1.4.4 SOFTWARE PIRACY AND CRIME RELATED TO IPRS ............................................................................................... 22

1.4.5 CYBER TERRORISM ........................................................................................................................................ 22

1.4.6 PHISHING .................................................................................................................................................... 22

1.4.7 COMPUTER VANDALISM ................................................................................................................................ 22

1.4.8 COMPUTER HACKING .................................................................................................................................... 22

1.4.9 CREATING AND DISTRIBUTING VIRUSES OVER INTERNET......................................................................................... 23

1.4.10 SPAMMING ............................................................................................................................................... 23

1.4.11 CROSS SITE SCRIPTING ................................................................................................................................. 23

1.4.12 ONLINE AUCTION FRAUD ............................................................................................................................. 24

1.4.13 CYBER SQUATTING ...................................................................................................................................... 24

1.4.14 LOGIC BOMBS ............................................................................................................................................ 24

1.4.15 WEB JACKING ............................................................................................................................................ 24

1.4.16 INTERNET TIME THEFTS ............................................................................................................................... 24

4




1.4.17 DENIAL OF SERVICE ATTACK .......................................................................................................................... 24

1.4.18 SALAMI ATTACK ......................................................................................................................................... 24

1.4.19 DATA DIDDLING ......................................................................................................................................... 25

1.4.20 EMAIL SPOOFING........................................................................................................................................ 25

2.1 AUTHENTICATION .................................................................................................................................... 26

2.2 ENCRYPTION............................................................................................................................................. 27

2.3 DIGITAL SIGNATURES ............................................................................................................................... 28

2.4 ANTIVIRUS ................................................................................................................................................ 29

2.5 FIREWALL ................................................................................................................................................. 30

2.6 STEGANOGRAPHY .................................................................................................................................... 31

3.1 COMPUTER FORENSICS ............................................................................................................................ 33

3.2 WHY SHOULD WE REPORT CYBER CRIME? ................................................................................................ 36

4.1 INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................ 40

4.2 SOME RECENT CYBER CRIME INCIDENTS .................................................................................................. 40

5.1 INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................ 47

5.2 COUNTER CYBER SECURITY INTIATIVES IN INDIA ...................................................................................... 47

6.1 GENERATING SECURE PASSWORD ............................................................................................................ 52

6.1.1 GUIDELINE FOR SETTING SECURE PASSWORD ...................................................................................................... 52

6.2 USING PASSWORD MANAGER .................................................................................................................. 55

6.2.1 WHAT IS A PASSWORD MANAGER? .................................................................................................................. 56

6.2.2 WHY YOU SHOULD USE IT? ............................................................................................................................. 56

6.2.3 HOW DOES IT WORK? .................................................................................................................................... 56

6.2.4 SOME POPULAR PASSWORD MANAGERS ............................................................................................................ 56

6.3 ENABLING TWO-STEP VERIFICATION ........................................................................................................ 62

6.4 SECURING COMPUTER USING FREE ANTIVIRUS ........................................................................................ 72

7.1 CONFIGURING FIREWALL ON MAC COMPUTER ........................................................................................ 75

7.1.1 TURNING ON AND CONFIGURING THE MAC OS X FIREWALL .................................................................................. 75

7.2 WORKING WITH WINDOWS FIREWALL IN WINDOWS .............................................................................. 78

7.2.1 FIREWALL IN WINDOWS 7 .............................................................................................................................. 78

7.2.2 CONFIGURING WINDOWS FIREWALL ................................................................................................................ 79

7.2.3 HOW TO START & USE THE WINDOWS FIREWALL WITH ADVANCED SECURITY .......................................................... 83

5




7.2.3.1 How to Access the Windows Firewall with Advanced Security ........................................................ 83

7.2.3.2 What Are The Inbound & Outbound Rules? ..................................................................................... 84

7.2.3.3 What Are The Connection Security Rules? ....................................................................................... 86

7.2.3.4 What Does the Windows Firewall with Advanced Security Monitor? ............................................. 87

8.1 FINDING THE BEST BROWSER ACCORDING TO THE USERS REQUIREMENT ............................................... 89

9.1 SAFE BROWSING ...................................................................................................................................... 94

9.1.1 HOW DO I KNOW IF A WEBSITE IS SECURE? ........................................................................................................ 94

9.2 TIPS FOR BUYING ONLINE ......................................................................................................................... 95

9.3 CLEARING CACHE FOR BROWSERS ............................................................................................................ 96

9.3.1 CLEARING CACHE FOR CHROME BROWSERS ABOVE VERSION 10 ............................................................................. 96

9.3.2 CLEARING CACHE FOR CHROME BROWSERS FROM VERSION 1 TO 9 ......................................................................... 99

9.3.3 CLEARING CACHE FOR SAFARI FOR IOS, IPHONE AND IPAD .................................................................................. 102

9.3.4 CLEARING CACHE FOR SAFARI FOR MAC OS X ................................................................................................... 103

9.3.5 CLEARING CACHE FOR SAFARI FOR WINDOWS ................................................................................................... 104

9.3.6 CLEARING CACHE FOR INTERNET EXPLORER 9, 10 AND 11 .................................................................................. 106

9.3.7 CLEARING CACHE FOR INTERNET EXPLORER 8.................................................................................................... 108

9.3.8 CLEARING CACHE FOR FIREFOX ...................................................................................................................... 111

9.3.9 CLEARING CACHE FOR FIREFOX 33 ................................................................................................................. 112

9.3.10 CLEARING CACHE FOR OPERA ...................................................................................................................... 114

9.3.11 CLEARING CACHE FOR CCLEANER ................................................................................................................. 115

10.1 WHAT IS WIRELESS LAN? ...................................................................................................................... 117

10.2 MAJOR ISSUES WITH WLAN .................................................................................................................. 118

10.2.1 SECURE WLAN ........................................................................................................................................ 118

10.2.2 WI-FI AT HOME........................................................................................................................................ 118

11.1 SAFE BROWSING GUIDELINES FOR SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES ........................................................... 123

11.1.1GENERAL TIPS ON USING SOCIAL NETWORKING PLATFORMS SAFELY .................................................................... 124

11.1.2 POSTING PERSONAL DETAILS ...................................................................................................................... 125

11.1.3 FRIENDS, FOLLOWERS AND CONTACTS .......................................................................................................... 125

11.1.4 STATUS UPDATES ..................................................................................................................................... 126

11.1.5 SHARING ONLINE CONTENT ........................................................................................................................ 126

11.1.6 REVEALING YOUR LOCATION ....................................................................................................................... 126

11.1.7 SHARING VIDEOS AND PHOTOS ................................................................................................................... 127

11.1.8 INSTANT CHATS ........................................................................................................................................ 127

11.1.9 JOINING AND CREATING GROUPS, EVENTS AND COMMUNITIES ......................................................................... 127

6




11.2 EMAIL SECURITY TIPS ........................................................................................................................... 128

12.1 INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................................... 130

12.2 SMARTPHONE SECURITY GUIDELINES ................................................................................................... 131

12.2.1 PURSES, WALLETS, SMARTPHONES .............................................................................................................. 131

12.2.2 PLATFORMS, SETUP AND INSTALLATION ........................................................................................................ 132

12.2.2.1 Platforms and Operating Systems ............................................................................................... 132

12.2.2.2 Feature Phones ............................................................................................................................ 132

12.2.2.3 Branded and locked smartphones ............................................................................................... 133

12.2.2.4 General Setup .............................................................................................................................. 133

12.2.2.5 Installing and updating applications ........................................................................................... 133

12.2.3 COMMUNICATING SECURELY(THROUGH VOICE AND MESSAGES) WITH A SMARTPHONE ......................................... 134

12.2.3.1 Secure Voice Communication ...................................................................................................... 134

12.2.3.2 Sending Messages Securely ......................................................................................................... 137

12.2.3.3 Storing Information on your Smartphone .................................................................................... 138

12.2.3.4 Sending Email from your Smartphone ......................................................................................... 139

12.2.3.5 Capturing Media with your Smartphone ..................................................................................... 139

12.2.3.6 Accessing the Internet Securely from your Smartphone .............................................................. 140

12.2.3.7Advanced Smart Phone Security ................................................................................................... 141

REFERENCES ....................................................................................................................................................... 144







7




INTRODUCTION TO CYBER SPACE

1.1 INTRODUCTION
st

Internet is among the most important inventions of the 21  century which have affected our

life. Today internet have crosses every barrier and have changed the way we use to talk, play

games, work, shop, make friends, listen music,  see movies, order food, pay bill, greet your

friend on his birthday/ anniversary, etc.  You name it, and we have an app in place for that. It

has facilitated our life by making it comfortable. Gone are the days when we have to stand in

a long queue for paying our telephone and electricity bills. Now we can pay it at a click of a

button from our home or office. The technology have reached to an extent that we don‟t even

require a computer for using internet. Now we have internet enabled smartphone, palmtops,

etc. through which we can remain connected to our friends, family and office 24x7.  Not only

internet has simplified our life but also it has brought many things within the reach of the

middle class by making them cost effective. It was not long back, while making an ISD or

even a STD call, the eyes were stricken on the pulse meter. The calls were very costly. ISD

and STD were used to pass on urgent messages only and the rest of the routine

communication was done using letters since it was a relatively very cheap. Now internet have

made it possible to not only talk but use video conference using popular applications like

skype, gtalk etc. at a very low price to a level where a one hour video chat using internet is

cheaper that the cost of sending a one   page document from Delhi to Bangalore using speed-

post or courier service. Not only this, internet has changed the use of the typical devices that

were used by us. Television can be used not only for watching popular tv shows and movies

but can be used for calling/ video chatting with friend using internet. Mobile phone is not only

used for making a call but viewing a latest movie. We can remain connected to everyone, no

matter what our location is. Working parents from office can keep eye on their children at

home and help them in their homework. A businessman can keep eye on his staff, office,

shop, etc with a click of a button. It has facilitated our life in more than one way. Have you

ever wondered from where this internet came? Let us discuss the brief history of internet and

learn how this internet was invented and how it evolved to an extent that now we cannot think

of our lives without it.

1.1.1 History of Internet
I don‟t know what the cold war between USA and Russia gave to the world, but defiantly the

internet is one of those very useful inventions whose foundation was laid during cold war

8




th
days. Russia Launched the world‟s first satellite, SPUTNIK into the space on 4  October,

1957. This was clearly the victory of Russia over the cyber space and as a counter step,

Advanced Research Projects Agency, the research arm of Department of Defence, United

States, declared the launch of ARPANET(Advanced Research Projects Agency NETwork) in

early 1960‟s. This was an experimental network and was designed to keep the computers

connected to the this network to communicate with each other even if any of the node, due to

the bomb attack, fails to respond. The first message was sent over the ARPANET, a packing

switching network,  by Leonard Kleinrock's laboratory at University of California, Los

Angeles (UCLA). You will be surprised to know that the fist message that was sent over

internet was “LO”. Actually they intended to send work “LOGIN” and only the first two

letters reached its destination at second network node at Stanford Research Institute (SRI) and

before the last three letters could reach the destination the network was down due to glitch.

Soon the error was fixed and the message was resent and it

The major task that ARPANET have to play is to develop rules for communication i.e.

protocols for communicating over ARPANET.  The ARPANET in particular led to the

development of protocols for internetworking, in which multiple separate networks could be

joined into a network of networks. It resulted in the development if TCP/IP protocol suite,

which specifies the rules for joining and communicating over APRANET.

Soon after, in 1986 NSF(national Science Foundation) backbone was created to and five US

universities‟ computing centres were connected to form NSFnet. The participating

Universities were:

 Princeton University -- John von Neumann National Supercomputer Center, JvNC

 Cornell University -- Cornell Theory Center, CTC

 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign -- National Center for Supercomputing

Applications, NCSA

 Carnegie Mellon University -- Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center, PSC

 General Atomics -- San Diego Supercomputer Center, SDSC

NFSnet, the successor of ARPAnet, become popular by 1990 and ARPANET was

decommissioned. There were many parallel networks developed by other  Universities and

other countries like United Kingdom. In 1965, National Physical Laboratory(NPL) proposed a

packing switching network. Michigan Educational Research Information Triad formed

MERIT network in 1966 which was funded and supported by State of Michigan and the

9




National Science Foundation (NSF). France also developed a packet swiching network, know

as CYCLADES in 1973.

Now there were many parallel systems working on different protocols and the scientist were

looking for some common standard so that the networks could be interconnected.  In 1978,

TCP/IP protocol suits were ready and by 1983, the TCP/IP protocol were apopted by

ARPANET.

In 1981, the integration of two large network took place. NFS developed Computer Science

Network(CSNET) and was connected to ARPANET  using TCP/IP protocol suite. Now the

network was not only popular among the research community but the private played also took

interest in the network. Initially NFS supported speed of 56 kbit/s. It was upgraded to 1.5

Mbit/s in 1988 to facilitate the growth of network by involving merit network, IBM, MCA

and the state of Michigan.

After the copertates took realized the strength and merit of this network, they particepitaqted

in the develoement of the network to ripe its benefits. By late 1980s many Internet Service

Providers(ISPs) emerged to provide the backbone for carrying the network traffic. By 1991,

NFSNET was expended and was upgraded to 45Mbit/s. Many commercial ISPs provided

backbone serive and was popular among the corporate. To facilitate the commercial use of the

network, NFSNET was decommissioned in 1995 and now the Internet could carry

commercial traffic.

Now more and more Universities and research centres throughout the world connected to it.

Now this network was very popular amongs the research community and in 1991 National

Research and Education Network (NREN) was founded and the World Wide Web was

released.  Initially the role of internet was only limited to file transfer. The credit of internet

what we see it today goes to Tim Berners-Lee who introduced www.With the advent of www,

there was a transformation on how the network was used. Now this web of information can be

used to retrieve any information available over the internet. Software called, browser was

developed to browse the internet. It was developed by researchers at University of Illinois in

1992 and named as Mosaic. This browser enables to browse the internet the way we browse it

today.

1.1.1.1 Internet Addresses
With so many devices connected to the internet, we require some mechanism to uniquely

identify every device that is connected to the internet. Also we require some centralized

10




system which takes care of this mechanism so that the signs which are used to identify each

device are not duplicate; else the whole purpose is defeated. To take care of this, we have a

centralized authority known as Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), which is

responsible for assigning a unique number known as IP(Internet Protocol) address. An IP

address is a 32-bit binary number which is divided into four octets and each octet consists of 8

binary digits and these octet are separated by a dot(.). An example of an IP address is

11110110.01011010.10011100.1111100

Each 8-bits in an octet can have two binary values i.e. 0 and 1. Therefore, each octet can have
8

minimum value 0. i.e. 00000000 to maximum value 256 i.e. 11111111 and in total have 2 =

256 different combinations.

Again to remember this 32-bit address in binary is bit difficult, so for the better understanding

of the human being, it is expressed in a decimal format. But this decimal format is for human

understanding only and the computer understands it in binary format only. In decimal, the

above IP address is expressed as 123.45.78.125

These octets are used to create and separate different classes. An IP address consists of two

parts viz. Network and Host. Network part identifies the network different network and the

host part identifies a device of a particular network.

This address uniquely identifies a devices connected to the internet similar to the postal

system where we identify any house by fist identifying the county, then state, district, post

office, cluster/block and finally the house number. These IP addresses are classified into five

categories based on the availability of IP range. These categories/classes are:

Table 1: IP Address Classes

Class Address range Supports

Class A 1.0.0.1 to 126.255.255.254 Supports 16 million hosts on each of 127 networks.

Class B 128.1.0.1 to 191.255.255.254 Supports 65,000 hosts on each of 16,000 networks.

Class C 192.0.1.1 to 223.255.254.254 Supports 254 hosts on each of 2 million networks

Class D 224.0.0.0 to 239.255.255.255 Reserved for multicast groups

Class E 240.0.0.0 to 254.255.255.254 Reserved for future use, or Research and

Development Purposes.

IANA decentralises that task of assigning the IP addresses by allocating the large chunk of IP

addresses to   five Regional Internet Registries (RIRs), which are further responsible to

11




allocate the IP addresses in their zone. These RIRs along with their area of operations are

listed below:

 APNIC- This RIR is responsible for  serving the Asia Pacific region

 AfriNIC- This RIR  is responsible for serving the African region

 ARIN- This RIR  is responsible for serving North America and several Caribbean and

North Atlantic islands

 LACNIC- This RIR  is responsible for serving Latin America and the Caribbean, and

 RIPE NCC- This RIR  is responsible for serving Europe, the Middle East, and parts of

Central Asia

For liaison and coordinating between these five RIRs, there is an organization called Number

Resource Organization(NRO). These organizations are

1.1.1.2 DNS
Whenever we browse any website in the internet, we type name something like

www.uou.ac.in and we rarely deal with IP address like 104.28.2.92 but the fact is even if we

type http:\\ 104.28.2.92 in the URL, it will land us to the same webpage. The fact is we are

very comfortable using and remembering the names instead of a number. Moreover, these IP

address changes over time and some of the sites have multiple IP address. Also, the transfer of

the data over internet is only possible using IP addresses because the routing of the packet of

data sent over internet is done using IP address. There is a server called Domain Name

System(DNS) which take cares of this translation job to simplify and to save us from

remembering these changing IP address numbers, the DNS. Whenever you type an address

like http:\\www.uou.ac.in, there is a process called DNS name resolution, takes place in the

background. The computer keeps the track of recently visited sites and locally maintains a

database in DNS cache. In case, the IP address of the site you have requested for is not found

in the DNS cache of your local computer, then the next probable place to find it is DNS server

of your Internet Service Provider(ISP). These DNS servers of ISP also maintain the cache of

the recently visited pages.   Just in case, the information is not found here also, the DNS

server of the ISP forward the query to the root nameservers.  The root name servers publish

the root zone file to other DNS servers and clients on the Internet. The root zone file describes

where the authoritative servers for the DNS top-level domains (TLD) are located. There are

currently 13 rootname servers. They are:

 A - VeriSign Global Registry Services

12




 B - University of Southern California - Information Sciences Institute

 C - Cogent Communications

 D - University of Maryland

 E - NASA Ames Research Center

 F - Internet Systems Consortium, Inc.

 G - U.S. DOD Network Information Center

 H - U.S. Army Research Lab

 I - Autonomica/NORDUnet

 J - VeriSign Global Registry Services

 K - RIPE NCC

 L - ICANN

 M - WIDE Project

These root nameservers directs the query to the appropriate Top-Level Domain(TLD)

nameservers by reading the last part of the URL first. In our example the url was

http:\\www.uou.ac.in. The last part is .in. Some of the examples of TLD name servers are

.com, .biz, .org, .us, .in, etc. These TLD nameservers acts as a switchboard and direct the

query to the appropriate authoritative nameserver maintained by each domain. These

authoritative nameserver maintains DNS records along with other useful information. This

address record is returned back to the requesting host computer via TLD nameservers,

nameservers, ISP‟s DNS server. These intermediaty server keeps the recond of this IP address

in their DNS cache, so that if the same request is encountered again , they don‟t have to go

through this process again.  If the same URL is requested again, the DNS cache of the local

host computer will return the IP address of the URL.

1.1.1.3 Internet Infrastructure
Internet, as the name suggests, in a network of network i.e. it is a collection of several small,

medium and large networks. This clearly indicates to one fact, nobody is a single owner of the

internet and it is one of the proven example of collaborative success. Now you must be

surprised how such a large network which is spread across the continents can run without the

any problem. Yes it is correct that to monitor such a large network, we require an

international body which can frame the rules, regulation and protocols to join and use this

network.  Therefore, an international organization, known as “The Internet Society” was

formed in 1992 to take care of such issues.

13




Let us now discuss, how this internet works? How the email you sent to your friend is

received by your friend‟s computer located at another country/continent. When you are

working in your laptop/desktop in your home without connecting to the internet, your

computer is a standalone system. But, whenever you connect to the internet by dialling to

your Internet Service Provider(ISP) using your modem, you become the part of the network.

The ISP is the link between the internet backbone, through which the entire data route, and

the user. The ISP connects to the internet backbone at Network Access Points(NAP). These

NAPs are the provided by the large telecommunication companies at various regions. These

large telecommunication companies connect the countries and the continents by building and

maintaining the large backbone infrastructure to route data from NAP to NAP.  ISPs are

connected to this backbone at NAP and are responsible build and manage network locally. So

when you dial internet through modem, you first become part of the local ISP, which in turn

connects to the internet backbone through NAP. The data is routed through this backbone and

sent to the destination NAP, where the ISP of your friend‟s network is located. As soon as

your friend dials his modem to connect to the internet, the data is delivered to your friend‟s

computer.

1.1.1.4 World Wide Web
Sometimes we interchangeably use the term internet and world wide web or simply the web,

as it is popularly known as. But web is only one of the several the utilities that internet

provides. Some of the popular service that internet provides other then web is e-mail, usenet,

messaging service, FTP, etc.  The web use HTTP protocol to communicate over internet and

to exchange information. The web was developed at CERN (Europeen de Reserches

Nucleaires), Switzerland) by a UK scientist Tim Berners-Lee in 1989. It consists of all the

public web sites and all the devices that access the web content. WWW is an information

sharing model which is developed to exchange information over the internet. There are plenty

of public websites, which is a collection of web pages, available over the internet. These web-

pages contain plenty of information in a form of text, videos, audio and picture format.

These web pages are access using a application software called a web browser. Some of the

examples of the popular web browser are: Internet explorer, Chrome, Safari, Firefox, etc.

So this was a little indroduction about internet and how it functions. Now let us discuss about

cyber crime.

14




1.2 INTRODUCTION TO CYBER CRIME

The internet was born around 1960‟s where its access was limited to few scientist, researchers

and the defence only. Internet user base have evolved expontinanlty. Initially the computer

crime was only confined to making a physical damage to the computer and related

infrastructure. Around 1980‟s the trend changed from causing the physical damaging to

computers to making a computer malfunction using a malicious code called virus. Till then

the effect was not so widespread beacouse internet was only comfined to defence setups, large

international companies and research communities. In 1996, when internet was launched for

the public, it immeditly became populer among the masses and they slowly became dependent

on it to an extent that it have changed their lifestyle. The GUIs were written so well that the

user don‟t have to bother how the internet was functioning. They have to simply make few

click over the hyber links or type the desired information at the desired place without

bothering where this data is stored and how it is sent over the internet or wether the data can

accessed by another person who is conneted to the internet or wether the data packet sent over

the internet can be snoofed and tempered. The focus of the computer crime shifted from

marely damaging the computer or destroying or manipulating data for personal benefit to

financial crime. These computer attacks are incresing at a rapid pase. Every second around 25

computer became victim to cyber attack and around 800 million individuals are effected by it

till 2013. CERT-India have reported around 308371 Indian websites to be hacked between

2011-2013. It is also estimated that around $160 million are lost per year due to cyber crime.

This figure is very conservative as most of the cases are never reported.

Accoring to the 2013-14 report of the standing committee on Information Technology to the

15th Lok Sabha by ministry of communication and information technology, India is a third

largest number do Intrernet users throughout the world with an estimated 100 million internet

users as on June, 2011 and the numbers are growing rapidly. There are around 22 million

broadband connections in India till date operated by around 134 major Internet Service

Providers(ISPs).

Before discussing the matter further, let us know what the cyber crime is?

The term cyber crime is used to describe a unlawful activity in which computer or computing

devices such as smartphones, tablets, Personal Digital Assistants(PDAs),  etc. which are stand

alone or a part of a network are used as a tool or/and target of criminal acitivity. It is often

15




commited by the people of destructive and criminal mindset either for revenge, greed or

adventure.

1.2.1 Classification of Cyber Crimes
The cyber criminal could be internal or external to the organization facing the cyber attack.

Based on this fact, the cyber crime could be categorized into two types:

 Insider Attack: An attack to the network or the computer system by some person with

authorized system access is known as insider attack. It is generally performed by

dissatisfied or unhappy inside employees or contractors. The motive of the insider

attack could be revenge or greed. It is comparitively easy for an insider to perform a

cyber attack as he is well aware of the policies, processes, IT architecture and

wealness of the security system. Moreover, the attacker have an access to the network.

Therefore it is comparatively easy for a  insider attacker to steel sensitive information,

crash the network, etc. In most of the cases the reason for insider attack is when a

employee is fired or assigned new roles in an organization, and the role is not reflected

in the IT policies. This opens a vernability window for the attacker. The insider attack

could be prevented by planning and installing an Internal intrusion detection systems

(IDS) in the organization.

 External Attack: When the attacker is either hired by an insider or an external entity to

the organization, it is known as external attack. The organization which is a victim of

cyber attack not only faces financial loss but also the loss of reputation.  Since the

attacker is external to the organization, so these attackers usually scan and gathering

information.An expreicend network/security administrator keeps regual eye on the log

generated by the firewalls as extertnal attacks can be traced out by carefully analysinig

these firewall logs. Also, Intrusion Detection Systems are installed to keep an eye on

external attacks.

The cyber attacks can also be classified as structure attacks and unstructured attacks based on

the level of maturity of the attacker. Some of the authors have classified these attacks as a

form of external attacks but there is precedence of the cases when a structured attack was

performed by an internal employee. This happens in the case when the competitor company

wants the future strategy of an organization on certain points. The attacker may strategically

gain access to the company as an employee and access the required information.

16




 Unstructured attacks: These attacks are generally performed by amatures who don‟t

have any predefined motives to perform the cyber attack. Usually these amatures try to

test a tool readily available over the internet on the network of a random company.

 Structure Attack: These types of attacks are performed by highly skilled and

experienced people and the motives of these attacks are clear in their mind. They have

access to sophisticated tools and technologies to gain access to other networks without

being noticed by their Intrusion Detection Systems(IDSs). Moreover, these attacker

have the necessary expertise to develop or modify the existing tools to satisfy their

purpose. These types of attacks are usually performed by professional criminals, by a

country on other rival countries, politicians to damage the image of the rival person or

the country, terrorists, rival companies, etc.

Cyber crimes have turned out to be a low-investment, low-risk business with  huge returns.

Now-a-days these structured crimes are performed are highly organized. There is a perfect

hierarchical organizational setup like formal organizations and some of them have reached a

level in technical capabilities at par with those of developed nation.   They are targeting large

financial organizations, defence and nuclear establishments and they are also into online

drugs trading.

Criminal
Boss

They are Trojan Provider and
Manager. They are responsible for Under Boss

trojen command and control.

They are the attackers crimeware
toolkit owner. They distribute Trojen Campaign Campaign Campaign
in legtimate websites through their Manager Manager Manager

affiliation network.

Stolen Data Stolen Data Stolen Data
Reseller Reseller Reseller



Figure 1 : Hierarchical Organisational Structure



17




The role of all the people in the hierarchy reamin changing and it is based on the oppourtinity.

If a hacker who have hacked sesetive data from an organization may use it for financially

exploiting the organisation himself. In case, the hacker himself have the technical expertise

for it, he will do it himself, otherwise he may find a buyer who is intrested in that data and

have the technical expertize.

There are some cyber criminals offers on-demand and service.  The person, organization or a

country may contact these cyber criminals for hacking an organization to gain access to some

sensetive data , or create massive denial-of –service attack on their compititors. Based on the

demand of the customer the hackers write malware, virus, etc to suit their requirements. An

organizaiton effected by a cyber attack, not only faces finincial loss, but its repuration is also

adversly affected, and the compitititor organization will definatly benefited by it.

1.2.2 Reasons for Commission of Cyber Crimes
There are many reasons which act as a catalyst in the growth of cyber crime. Some of the

prominent reasons are:

a. Money: People are motivated towards committing cyber crime is to make quick and

easy money.

b. Revenge: Some people try to take revenge with other person/organization/society/

caste or religion by defaming its reputation or bringing economical or physical loss.

This comes under the category of cyber terrorism.

c. Fun: The amateur do cyber crime for fun. They just want to test the latest tool they

have encountered.

d. Recognition: It is considered to be pride if someone hack the highly secured networks

like defense sites or networks.

e. Anonymity- Many time the anonymity that a cyber space provide motivates the person

to commit cyber crime as it is much easy to commit a cyber crime over the cyber

space and remain anonymous as compared to real world.

It is much easier to get away with criminal activity in a cyber world than in the real

world. There is a strong sense of anonymity than can draw otherwise respectable

citizens to abandon their ethics in pursuit personal gain.

f. Cyber Espionage: At times the government itself is involved in cyber trespassing to

keep eye on other person/network/country. The reason could be politically,

economically socially motivated.



18




1.3 MALWARE AND ITS TYPE

Malware stands for “Malicious Software” and it is designed to gain access or installed into the

computer without the consent of the user. They perform unwanted tasks in the host computer

for the benefit of a third party. There is a full range of malwares which can seriously degrade

the performance of the host machine. There is a full range of malwares which are simply

written to distract/annoy the user, to the complex ones which captures the sensitive data from

the host machine and send it to remote servers. There are various types of malwares present in

the Internet. Some of the popular ones are:

1.3.1 Adware
It is a special type of malware which is used for forced advertising. They either redirect the

page to some advertising page or pop-up an additional page which promotes some product or

event. These adware are financially supported by the organizations whose products are

advertised.

1.3.2 Spyware
It is a special type of which is installed in the target computer with or without the user

permission and is designed to steal sensitive information from the target machine. Mostly it

gathers the browsing habits of the user and the send it to the remote server without the

knowledge of the owner of the computer.  Most of the time they are downloaded in to the host

computer while downloading freeware i.e. free application programmes from the internet.

Spywares may be of various types; It can keeps track of the cookies of the host computer, it

can act as a keyloggers to sniff the banking passwords and sensitive information, etc.

1.3.3 Browser hijacking software
There is some malicious software which are downloaded along with the free software offered

over the internet and installed in the host computer without the knowledge of the user. This

software modifies the browsers setting and redirect links to other unintentional sites.

1.3.4 Virus
A virus is a malicious code written to damage/harm the host computer by deleting or

appending a file, occupy memory space of the computer by replicating the copy of the code,

slow down the performance of the computer, format the host machine, etc.  It can be spread

via email attachment, pen drives, digital images, e-greeting, audio or video clips, etc. A virus

may be present in a computer but it cannot activate itself without the human intervention.

19




Until and unless the executable file(.exe) is execute, a virus cannot be activated in the host

machine.

1.3.5 Worms
They are a class of virus which can replicate themselves. They are different from the virus by

the fact that they does not require human intervention to travel over the network and spread

from the infected machine to the whole network. Worms can spread either through network,

using the loopholes of the Operating System or via email. The replication and spreading of the

worm over the network consumes the network resources like space and bandwidth and force

the network to choke.

1.3.6 Trojan Horse
Trojan horse is a malicious code that is installed in the host machine by pretending to be

useful software. The user clicks on the link or download the file which pretends to be a useful

file or software from legitimate source. It not only damages the host computer by

manipulating the data but also it creates a backdoor in the host computer so that it could be

controlled by a remote computer. It can become a part of botnet(robot-network), a network of

computers which are infected by malicious code and controlled by central controller. The

computers of this network which are infected by malicious code are known as zombies.

Trojens neither infect the other computers in the network nor do they replicate.



20




Figure 2: A typical botnet



1.3.7 Scareware
Internet has changed how we talk, shop, play etc. It has even changed the way how the

criminal target the people for ransom. While surfing the Internet, suddenly a pop-up alert

appears in the screen which warns the presence of dangerous virus, spywares, etc. in the

user‟s computer. As a remedial measure, the message suggests the used download the full

paid version of the software. As the user proceeds to download, a malicious code, known as

scareware is downloaded into the host computer. It holds the host computer hostage until the

ransom is paid. The malicious code can neither be uninstalled nor can the computer be used
1

till the ransom is paid. A sample message alert of a scareware is shown below in Fig 3







Figure 3: Sample Warning Message of a
1

Scareware



1.4 KINDS OF CYBER CRIME

Various types of cyber crimes are:

1.4.1 Cyber Stalking
 It is an act of stalking, harassing or threatening someone using Internet/computer as a

medium. This is often done to defame a person and use email, social network, instant

messenger, web-posting, etc. as a using Internet as a medium as it offers anonymity.  The

behaviour includes false accusations, threats, sexual exploitation to minors, monitoring, etc.


1
 Image courtesy: https://www.flickr.com/photos/alamagordo/2372928527

21




1.4.2 Child Pornography
 It is an act of possessing image or video of a minor (under 18), engaged in sexual conduct.

1.4.3 Forgery and Counterfeiting
It is a use of computer to forgery and counterfeiting is a document. With the advancement in

the hardware and the software, it is possible to produce counterfeit which matches the original

document to such an extent that it is not possible to judge the authenticity of the document

without expert judgement.

1.4.4 Software Piracy and Crime related to IPRs
Software piracy is an illegal reproduction and distribution for personal use or business. It

comes under crime related to IPR infringement. Some of the other crimes under IPR

infringement are: download of songs, downloading movies, etc.

1.4.5 Cyber Terrorism
It is defined as the use of computer resources to intimidate or coerce government, the civilian

population or any segment thereof in furtherance of political or social objectives.

1.4.6 Phishing
It is a process of acquiring personal and sensitive information of an individual via email by

disguising as a trustworthy entity in an electronic communication. The purpose of phishing is

identity theft and the personal information like username, password, and credit card number

etc. may be used to steal money from user account. If a telephone is used as a medium for

identity theft, it is known as Vishing (voice phishing). Another form of phishing is Smishing,

in which sms is used to lure customers.

1.4.7 Computer Vandalism
 It is an act of physical destroying computing resources using physical force or malicious

code.

1.4.8 Computer Hacking
It is a practice of modifying computer hardware and software to accomplish a goal outside the

creator‟s original purpose. The purpose of hacking a computer system may vary from simply

demonstrations of the technical ability, to sealing, modifying or destroying information for

social, economic or political reasons. Now the corporate are hiring hackers, a person who is

engaged in hacking computers, to intentionally hack the computer of an organization to find

and fix security vulnerabilities.

The hackers may be classified as:

22




 White Hat: white hat hackers are the persons who hack the system to find the security

vulnerabilities of a system and notify to the organizations so that a preventive action

can be taken to protect the system from outside hackers. White hat hackers may be

paid employee of an organization who is employed to find the security loop-holes, or

may be a freelancer who just wants to prove his mantle in this field. They are popular

known as ethical hackers.

 Black Hat: in contrast to the white hat, the black hat hack the system with ill

intentions. They may hack the system for social, political or economically motivated

intentions. They find the security loopholes the system, and keep the information

themselves and exploit the system for personal or organizational benefits till

organization whose system is compromised is aware of this, and apply security

patches. They are popularly known as crackers.

 Grey Hat: Grey hat hackers find out the security vulnerabilities and report to the site

administrators and offer the fix of the security bug for a consultancy fee.

 Blue hat: A blue hat hacker is someone outside computer security consulting firms

who is used to bug-test a system prior to its launch, looking for exploits so they can be

closed.

1.4.9 Creating and distributing viruses over internet
 The spreading of an virus can cause business and financial loss to an organization. The loss

includes the cost of repairing the system, cost associated with the loss of business during

downtime and cost of loss of opportunity. The organization can sue the hacker, if found, for

the sum of more than or equivalent to the loss borne by the organization.

1.4.10 Spamming
Sending of unsolicited and commercial bulk message over the internet is known as spamming.

An email can be classified as spam, if it meets following criteria:

a. Mass mailing:- the email is not targeted to one particular person but to a large number

of peoples.

b. Anonymity:- The real identify of the person not known

c. Unsolicited:- the email is neither expected nor requested for the recipient.

These spams not only irritate the recipients and overload the network but also waste the time

and occupy the valuable memory space of the mailbox.

1.4.11 Cross Site Scripting

23




It is an activity which involves injecting a malicious client side script into a trusted website.

As soon as the browser executes the malicious script, the malicious script gets access to the

cookies and other sensitive information and sent to remote servers. Now this information can

be use to gain financial benefit or physical access to a system for personal interest.

1.4.12 Online Auction Fraud
There are many genuine websites who offers online auction over internet. Taking the

advantage of the reputation of these websites, some of the cyber criminals lure the customers

to online auction fraud schemes which often lead to either overpayment of the product or the

item is never delivered once the payment is made.

1.4.13 Cyber Squatting
It is an act of reserving the domain names of someone else‟s trademark with intent to sell it

afterwards to the organization who is the owner of the trademark at a higher price.

1.4.14 Logic Bombs
These are malicious code inserted into legitimate software. The malicious action is triggered

by some specific condition. If the conditions holds true in future, the malicious action begins

and based on the action defined in the malicious code, they either destroy the information

stored in the system or make system unusable.

1.4.15 Web Jacking
The hacker gain access to a website of an organization and either blocks it or modify it to

serve political, economical or social interest. The recent examples of web jacking are some of

the websites of the educational institutes were hacked by Pakistani hackers and an animation

which contains Pakistani flags were flashed in the homepage of these websites. Another

example is Indian hackers hacked website of Pakistani railways and flashed Indian flag in the

homepage for several hours on the occasion of Independence Day of India in 2014.

1.4.16 Internet Time Thefts
Hacking the username and password of ISP of an individual and surfing the internet at his

cost is Internet Time Theft.

1.4.17 Denial of Service Attack
It is a cyber attack in which the network is chocked and often collapsed by flooding it with

useless traffic and thus preventing the legitimate network traffic.

1.4.18 Salami Attack

24




It is an attack which proceeds with small increments and final add up to lead to a major

attack.  The increments are so small that they remain unnoticed. An example of salami attack

is gaining access to online banking of an individual and withdrawing amount in such a small

amounts that it remains unnoticed by the owner. Often there is default trigger set in the

banking website and transactions below say, Rs. 1000 withdrawal are not reported to the

owner of the account. Withdrawing amount of Rs. 1000 over a period of time will lead to total

withdrawal of a large sum.

1.4.19 Data Diddling
It is a practice of changing the data before its entry into the computer system. Often, the

original data is retained after the execution on the data is done. For example, DA or the basic

salary of the person is changed in the payroll data of an individual for pay calculation. Once

the salary is calculated and transferred to his account, the total salary is replaced by his actual

salary in the report.

1.4.20 Email Spoofing
It is a process of changing the header information of an e-mail so that its original source is not

identified and it appears to an individual at the receiving end that the email has been

originated from source other than the original source.

25




CYBER SECURITY TECHNIQUES

There are many cyber security techniques to combat the cyber security attacks. The next

section discusses some of the popular techniques to counter the cyber attacks.

2.1 AUTHENTICATION

It is a process of identifying an individual and ensuring that the individual is the same who

he/she claims to be. A typical method for authentication over internet is via username and

password. With the increase in the reported cases of cyber crime by identity theft over

internet, the organizations have made some additional arrangements for authentication like

One Time Password(OTP), as the name suggest it is a password which can be used one time

only and is sent to the user as an SMS or an email at the mobile number/email address that he

have specified during the registration process.  It is known as two-factor authentication

method and requires two type of evidence to authentication an individual to provide an extra

layer of security for authentication. Some other popular techniques for two-way

authentication are: biometric data, physical token, etc. which are used in conjunction with

username and password.

The authentication becomes more important in light of the fact that today the multinational

organizations have changed the way the business was to be say, 15 years back. They have

offices present around the Globe, and an employee may want an access which is present in a

centralized sever. Or an employee is working from home and not using the office intranet and

wants an access to some particular file present in the office network. The system needs to

authenticate the user and based on the credentials of that user, may or may not provide access

to the used to the information he requested. The process of giving access to an individual to

certain resources based on the credentials of an individual is known as authorization and often

this process is go hand-in-hand with authorization. Now, one can easily understand the role of

strong password for authorization to ensure cyber security as an easy password can be a cause

of security flaw and can bring the whole organization at high risk. Therefore, the password

policy of an organization should be such that employees are forced to use strong passwords

(more than 12 characters and combination of lowercase and uppercase alphabets along with

numbers and special characters) and prompt user to change their password frequently. In

some of the bigger organizations or an organization which deals in sensitive information like

defence agencies, financial institutions, planning commissions, etc. a hybrid authentication

26




system is used which combines both the username and password along with hardware security

measures like biometric system, etc. Some of the larger organizations also use VPN(Virtual

Private Network), which is one of the method to provide secure access via hybrid security

authentication to the company network over internet.

2.2 ENCRYPTION

It is a technique to convert the data in unreadable form before transmitting it over the internet.

Only the person who have the access to the key and convert it in the readable form and read it.

Formally encryption can be defined as a technique to lock the data by converting it to

complex codes using mathematical algorithms. The code is so complex that it even the most

powerful computer will take several years to break the code. This secure code can safely be

transmitted over internet to the destination. The receiver, after receiving the data can decode it

using the key. The decoding of the complex code to original text using key is known as

decryption.  If the same key is used to lock and unlock the data, it is known as symmetric key

encryption.



2
Figure 4: Encryption

In symmetric key encryption, the after coding of data, the key is sent to the destination user

via some other medium like postal service, telephone, etc. because if the key obtained by the

hacker, the security of the data is compromised. Key distribution is a complex task because

the security of key while transmission is itself an issue. To avoid the transfer of key a method

called asymmetric key encryption, also known as public key encryption, is used. In


2
 Image courtesy: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/bc/Public_key_encryption_keys.png

27




asymmetric key encryption, the key used to encrypt and decrypt data are different. Every user

posse‟s two keys viz. public key and private key. As the name suggest, the public key of

every user is known to everyone but the private key is known to the particular user, who own

the key, only. Suppose sender A wants to send a secret message to receiver B through

internet. A will encrypt the message using B‟s public key, as the public key is known to

everyone. Once the message is encrypted, the message can safely be send to B over internet.

As soon as the message is received by B, he will use his private key to decrypt the message

and regenerate the original message.

2.3 DIGITAL SIGNATURES

It is a technique for validation of data. Validation is a process of certifying the content of a

document. The digital signatures not only validate the data but also used for authentication.

The digital signature is created by encrypting the data with the private key of the sender. The

encrypted data is attached along with the original message and sent over the internet to the

destination. The receiver can decrypt the signature with the public key of the sender. Now the

decrypted message is compared with the original message. If both are same, it signifies that

the data is not tempered and also the authenticity of the sender is verified as someone with the

private key(which is known to the owner only) can encrypt the data  which was then

decrypted by his public key. If the data is tempered while transmission, it is easily detected by

the receiver as the data will not be verified. Moreover, the massage cannot be re-encrypted

after tempering as the private key, which is posses only by the original sender, is required for

this purpose.

As more and more documents are transmitted over internet, digital signatures are essential

part of the legal as well as the financial transition. It not only provides the authentication of a

person and the validation of the document, it also prevents the denial or agreement at a later

stage. Suppose a shareholder instructs the broker via email to sell the share at the current

price. After the completion of the transaction, by any chance, the shareholder reclaims the

shares by claiming the email to be forge or bogus. To prevent these unpleasant situations, the

digital signatures are used.





28






3
Figure 5: Digital signature

2.4 ANTIVIRUS

There are verities of malicious programs like virus, worms, trojan horse, etc that are spread

over internet to compromise the security of a computer either to destroy data stored into the

computer or gain financial benefits by sniffing passwords etc. To prevent these malicious

codes to enter to your system, a special program called an anti-virus is used which is designed

to protect the system against virus. It not only prevents the malicious code to enter the system

but also detects and destroys the malicious code that is already installed into the system.

There are lots of new viruses coming every day. The antivirus program regularly updates its

database and provides immunity to the system against these new viruses, worms, etc.




3
 Image courtesy: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2b/Digital_Signature_diagram.svg

29






4
Figure 6: Different anvirus available on the market



2.5 FIREWALL

It is a hardware/software which acts as a shield between an organization‟s network and the

internet and protects it from the threats like virus, malware, hackers, etc. It can be used to

limit the persons who can have access to your network and send information to you.



5
Figure 7: Firewall

There are two type of traffic in an organization viz. inbound traffic and outbound traffic.

Using firewall, it is possible to configure and monitor the traffic of the ports. Only the packets

from trusted source address can enter the organization‟s network and the sources which are

blacklisted and unauthorized address are denied access to the network. It is important to have

firewalls to prevent the network from unauthorized access, but firewall does not guarantee

this until and unless it is configured correctly. A firewall can be implemented using hardware

as well as software or the combination of both.


4
 Image courtesy: https://www.flickr.com/photos/thomasguest/3027199004

5
 Image courtesy: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5b/Firewall.png

30




 Hardware Firewalls: example of hardware firewalls are routers through which the

network is connected to the network outside the organization i.e. Internet.

 Software Firewalls: These firewalls are installed and installed on the server and client

machines and it acts as a gateway to the organizations‟ network.

In the operating system like Windows 2003, Windows 2008 etc. it comes embedded with the

operating system. The only thing a user need to do is to optimally configure the firewall

according to their own requirement.  The firewalls can be configured to follow “rules” and

“policies” and based on these defined rules the firewalls can follow the following filtering

mechanisms.

 Proxy- all the outbound traffic is routed through proxies for monitoring and

controlling the packet that are routed out of the organization.

 Packet Filtering- based on the rules defined in the policies each packet is filtered by

their type, port information, and source & destination information. The example of

such characteristics is IP address, Domain names, port numbers, protocols etc.  Basic

packet filtering can be performed by routers.

 Stateful Inspection: rather than going through all the field of a packet, key features are

defined. The outgoing/incoming packets are judged based on those defined

characteristics only.

The firewalls are an essential component of the organizations‟ network. They not only protect

the organization against the virus and other malicious code but also prevent the hackers to use

your network infrastructure to launch DOS attacks.

2.6 STEGANOGRAPHY

It is a technique of hiding secret messages in a document file, image file, and program or

protocol etc. such that the embedded message is invisible and can be retrieved using special

software. Only the sender and the receiver know about the existence of the secret message in

the image. The advantage of this technique is that these files are not easily suspected.

31





6

Figure 8: Steganography

There are many applications of steganography which includes sending secret messages

without ringing the alarms, preventing secret files from unauthorized and accidental access

and theft , digital watermarks for IPR issues, etc.



Let us discuss how the data is secretly embeded inside the cover file( the medium like image,

video, audio, etc which is used for embed secret data) without being noticed. Let us take an

example of an image file which is used as a cover mediem. Each pixel of a high resolution

image is represented by 3 bytes(24 bits). If the 3 least significant bits of this 24 bits are altered

and used for hiding the data, the resultant image, after embeded the data into it, will have un-

noticible change in the image quality and only a very experienced and tranined eyes can

detect this change. In this way, evcery pixel can be used to hide 3 bits of information.

Similerly, introducing a white noise in an audio file at regular or randon interval can be used

to hide data in an audio or video files. There are various free softwares available for

Steganography. Some of the popular ones are: QuickStego, Xiao, Tucows, OpenStego, etc.




6
 Image courtesy: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b8/Seformatbmp-embedding_full.png

32




INVESTIGATING CYBER CRIMES: INTRODUCTION
TO CYBER FORENSIC



In the precedding chapters, we have dicussed the prevention techniques for cyber attack. What

if one have encounter cyber attack? What Next? The next step is to report the cyber crime.

But if a person is exposed to cyber forensic principles, the chances that the person accidently

distroy the vital cyber evidences are minimized.

3.1 COMPUTER FORENSICS

Cyber forensic is a branch of science which deals with tools and techniques for investigation

of digital data to find evidences against a crime which can be produced in the court of law. It

is a practice of preserving, extracting, analyzing and documenting evidance from digital

devices such as computers, digital storage media, smartphones, etc. so that they can be used to

make expert opinion in legal/administrative matters.

The computer forensic plays a vital role in an organization as the our dependency on

computing devices and internet is increasing day-by-day. According to a survey conducted by
7

University of California , 93% of all the informaiton generated during 1999 was generated in

digital form, on computers, only 7%  of the remaining information was generated using other

sources like paper etc. It not always easy to collect evidences as the data may be temperd,

deleted, hidden or encrypted. Digital foransic investigation is a highly skilled task which

needs the expose of various tools, techniques and guidelines for fininding and recovering the

digital evidances from the crime scene or the digital equipments used in the crime. With

digital equipments like smartphone, tablets, palmtops, smart tv, etc having increasing

processing capabilities and computation speed, the possibility of use of these devices in cyber

crime cannot be ruled out. A forancis investigator must not only have deep understanding of

the working of these devices and also hands-on exposure to the tools for accurate data retrival

so that the value and intrigity of the data is preserved.


7
 http://www.isfs.org.hk/publications/ComputerForensics_part1.pdf



33




A computer can be used intentionally or unintentionally to cyber crime. The intentional use is

to use your computer to send hate mails or installing cracked version of an otherwise licenced

software into your computer. Unintentional use is the computer you are using contains virus

and it is spread into the network and outside the network causing major loss to someone in

financial terms. Simillerly a computer can be directly used to commit a digital crime. For

example, your computer is used to access the sensitive and classified data and the data is sent

someone inside/outside the network who can use this data for him own benefit. The indirect

use of computer is when while downloading a crack of a software, a trozan horse is stored in

the computer, while creates a backdoor in the network to facilitate hacker.  Now the hacker

logs into your computer and use it for committing cyber crime. An experienced computer

forensic investigator plays a crucial role in distinguishing direct and indirect attack. Computer

forensic experts are also useful for recovery of accidental data loss, to detect industrial

espionage, counterfeiting, etc.

In large organization, as soon as a cyber crime is detected by the incident handling team,

which is responsible for monitoring and detection of security event on a computer or
8

computer network, initial incident management processes are followed . This is an in-house

process. It follows following steps:

1. Preparation: The organization prepares guidelines for incident response and assigns

roles and the responsibilities of each member of the incident response team. Most of

the large organizations earn a reputation in the market and any negative sentiment may

negatively affect the emotions of the shareholders. Therefore, an effective

communication is required to declare the incident. Hence, assigning the roles based on

the skill-set of a member is important.

2. Identification: based on the traits the incident response team verifies whether an event

had actually occurred. One of the most common procedures to verify the event is

examining the logs. Once the occurrence of the event is verified, the impact of the

attack is to be assessed.

3. Containment: based on the feedback from the assessment team, the future course of

action to respond to the incident is planned in this step.


8
 http://countuponsecurity.com/2012/12/21/computer-security-incident-handling-6-steps/



34




4. Eradication:  In this step, the strategy for the eradication or mitigate of the cause of

the threat is planned and executed.

5.  Recovery:  it is the process of returning to the normal operational state after

eradication of the problem.

6. Lesson Learned: if a new type of incident is encounter, it is documented so that this

knowledge can be used to handle such situations in future.

The second step in the process is forensic investigation is carried out to find the evidence
rd

of the crime, which is mostly performed by 3  party companies. The computer forensic

investigation involves following steps:

1. Identify incident and evidence: this is the first step performed by the system

administrator where he tries to gather as much information as possible about the

incident. Based on this information the scope and severity of the attack is assessed.

Once the evidence of the attack is discovered, the backup of the same is taken for the

investigation purpose. The forensic investigation is never performed on the original

machine but on the data that is restored from the backup.

2. Collect and preserve evidence: Various tools like Helix, WinHex, FKT Imager, etc.

are used to capture the data. Once the backup of the data is obtained, the custody of

the evidence and the backup is taken. MD5(message digest) hash of the backup is

calculated and matched with the original one to check the integrity of the data. Other

important sources of information like system log, network information, logs generated

by Intrusion Detection Systems(IDS), port and process information are also captured.

3. Investigate: The image of the disk is restored from the backup and the investigation is

performed by reviewing the logs, system files, deleted and updates files, CPU uses and

process logs, temporary files, password protected and encrypted files, images, videos

and data files for possible stegnographic message, etc.

4. Summarize and Presentation: The summery of the incident is presented in

chronological order. Based on the investigation, conclusions are drawn and possible

cause is explained.

While carrying out the digital forensic investigation, rules and procedure must be applied.

Specially while capturing the evidence. It should be ensured that the actions that are taken for

capturing the data do not change the evidence. The integrity of the data should be maintained.

It must be ensured that the devices used for capturing the backup are free from contamination.

35




Moreover, all the activities related to seizure, access, storage or transfer of digital evidence
9

must be fully documented, preserved and available for review . Prevention is always better

than cure. It is always recommended to fine tune your intrusion detection system like firewall

occasionally perform penetration tests on your network to avoid pray to hacker. Last but not

the least, report the crime.

3.2 WHY SHOULD WE REPORT CYBER CRIME?

Some of the companies do not report a cyber crime incident because they fear this will harm

their reputation amongst its shareholders. Some of the data are very sensitive and its

disclosure may impact their business negatively. But, the fact is until and unless a cyber crime

incident is reported, the cyber criminals will never be crabbed by the law enforcement

agencies. This will further worsen the conditions and encourage the criminals to repeat these

types of incidents with the same or the other organizations.  So it is very important to identify

and prosecute them. This will help not only to identify the existing threats to the economy and

the infrastructure but also new threats are identified. Depending on the scope of a cyber crime,

the cyber crime should be reported to nearest cyber cell of your locality, state cyber cell,

central investigating agencies like CBI, IB or the international bodies like Interpol.

Some of the addresses of the cyber coordinating units are:

 Assam                                                        Haryana

Address: CID HQ,Dy.SP., Assam Police   A   d  d   r e  s  s :       C yber Crime and Technical

Contact Details: Ph: +91-361-252-618, +91 Investigation Cell, Joint Commisioner of Police,

9435045242     Old S.P.Office complex,Civil Lines, Gurgaon

E-mail id: ssp_cod@assampolice.com E-mail: jtcp.ggn@hry.nic.in

Mumbai  Chennai

Address: Cyber Crime Investigation Cell, Address: Asst. Commr. of Police, Cyber Crimes

Office of Commissioner of Police Cell,

office,Annex -3 Building, 1st floor, Near Vepery, Chennai 7

Crawford Market, Mumbai-01. Contact Details: 04423452348, 04423452350


9
 http://www.isfs.org.hk/publications/011009/Collins-CIO&CeO.pdf



36




Contact Details: +91-22-22630829, +91-22- E-mail id: cybercrimechn@yahoo.com

22641261
For Rest of Tamil Nadu,

Web site: http://www.cybercellmumbai.com
Address: A-Wing, III rd Floor, Rajaji Bhawan,

E-mail id: officer@cybercellmumbai.com
Besant Nagar,

Thane
Chennai-600090

Address: 3rd Floor, Police Commissioner
Contact Details: 044-24461959, 24468889,

Office, Near Court Naka, Thane West, Thane
24463888

400601.

E-mail id: hobeochn@cbi.gov.in
Contact Details: +91-22-25424444

Web site: www.thanepolice.org

E-Mail: police@thanepolice.org



Bangalore (for whole of the Karnataka) Hyderabad

Address: Cyber Crime Police Station, C.O.D Address:

Headquarters, Cyber Crime Police Station, Crime Investigation

Carlton House, # 1, Palace Road, Bangalore - Department,

560 001 3rd Floor, D.G.P. office, Lakdikapool, Hyderabad

Contact Details: +91-80-2220 1026, +91-80- – 500004

2294 3050, +91-80-2238 7611 (FAX)   C   o  n  t a  c  t     D   e  t a  i l s  :     + 9 1 - 4 0 - 2 3 24 0663, +91-40-

Web site:  2785 2274,          +91-40-2785 2040, +91-40-

http://www.cyberpolicebangalore.nic.in 2329 7474 (Fax)

Email-id: Website:

ccps@blr.vsnl.net.in, ccps@kar.nic.in http://www.cidap.gov.in/cybercrimes.aspx

E-mailid:

cidap@cidap.gov.in, info@cidap.gov.in,

cybercell_hyd@hyd.appolice.gov.in

Delhi Pune

CBI Cyber Crime Cell: Superintendent of Address : Deputy Commissioner of

Police, Police(Crime),                           Office of the

Cyber Crime Investigation Cell, Central Commissioner Office, 2, Sadhu Vaswani Road,

Bureau of Investigation, 5th Floor, Block Camp,Pune 411001

37




No.3, CGO Complex, Contact Details: +91-20-26123346, +91-20-

Lodhi Road, New Delhi – 3 26127277

Contact Details: +91-11-4362203, 011- +91-20-2616 5396, +91-20-2612 8105 (Fax)

26851998 Website: www.punepolice.gov.in

011-26515229, +91-11-4392424   E   - M    a  i l :  c r i m e c o m p . p une@nic.in,

Web site: http://cbi.nic.in   p u n e p o l i c e @ v s n l . c o m

Asst. Commissioner of Police,

Cyber Crime Cell, EOW, Crime Branch,2nd

Floor, Police Training School, Malaviya

Nagar, New Delhi-110 017

E-Mail: cbiccic@bol.net.in, dcp-eow-

dl@nic.in

 Himachal Pradesh   G   u   j a  r  a  t

Address : CID Office ,Dy.SP, Himachal DIG, CID, Crime and Railways. Fifth Floor,

Pradesh           Police Bhavan

Sector 18, Gandhinagar 382 018
Contact Details: +91-94180 39449

Contact Details: +91-79-2325 4384, +91-79-

E-mail:soodbrijesh9@gmail.com 2325 0798, +91-79-2325 3917 (Fax)

Jharkhand                                                   Kerala

Address: IG-CID,Organized Crime, Rajarani Address : Hitech Cell, Police Head Quarters,

Building, Doranda Ranchi – 834002   T h i r u v a n a n t h a p u r a m

Contact Details:: +91-651-2400 737, +91- Contact Details: +91-471 272 1547, +91-471 272

651-2400 738      2768

E-mail: a.gupta@jharkhandpolice.gov.in E-mail: hitechcell@keralapolice.gov.in



Jammu                                                                 O r i s s a

Address: SSP-Crime, CPO Address: CID,Crime Branch, Orissa

Complex,Panjtirthi,              Jammu-180004   C   o  n  t a  c  t         D   e  t a  i l s  :         + 9 1        9 4 374 50370

Contact Details:  +91-191-257-8901   E   - m   a  i l  :   s p l c i d c b . o r p o l @nic.in

38




E-mail: sspcrmjmu-jk@nic.in

Meghalaya                                                        Punjab

Address: SCRB,Superintendent of Police Address: Cyber Crime Police Station, DSP

Meghalaya  Cyber Crime, S.A.S Nagar,Patiala, Punjab

Contact Details: +91 98630 64997   C   o  n  t a  c  t   D   e  t a  i l s  :   +91 172 2748 100

E-mail: scrb-meg@nic.in

Bihar                                                                    W   est Bengal

Address: Cyber Crime Investigation Unit, Address: CID, Cyber Crime, West Bengal

Dy.S.P.Kotwali Police Station, Patna   C   o  n  t a  c  t           D   e t a  i l  s :           +9133 24506163

Contact Details: +91 94318 18398   E   - m   a  i l  : o c c y b e r @ cidwestbengal.gov.in

E-mail: cciu-bih@nic.in

Uttar Pradesh    U   t t  a  r  a  K   h  a  n  d

Address: Cyber Complaints Redressal Cell, Address: Special Task Force Office

Nodal Officer Cyber Cell Agra, Agra Range Sub Inspector of Police, Dehradoon

7,Kutchery Road, Contact Details:  +91 135 264098, +91 94123

Baluganj,Agra-232001, Uttar Pradesh 70272

Contact Details: +919410837559 E-mail:dgc-police-us@nic.in

E-mail: info@cybercellagra.com





39




SOME RECENT CYBER SECURITY ATTACKS

4.1 INTRODUCTION

The proliferation of Internet amongt the population is getting deep day-by-day. This not only

increase the scope of e-governance and e-commerce in the area of healthcare, banking, power

distribution, etc. but also expose these sectors to cyber threats like hacking, credential thefts,

data tempering, account hijacking, etc. According to a report,there were around 62,189 cyber

security incidents, originating mainly from Countries including US, Europe, Brazil, Turkey,

China, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Algeria and the UAE, in the period from Jan-May, 2014. Also,

aroung 10,000 Indian government sites were compromised in this period. India has a seroius

sortage of IT Security professional to deal with such treats in effective manner. According to

a report, India needs around one million cyber security professionals to deal with cyber

threats effectively.

4.2 SOME RECENT CYBER CRIME INCIDENTS

In the current section, we will discuss some of the common cyber crimes and fruads incidents

over internet so that you could appriciate how these little ignorance could lead to a big

digaster.

1. Paypal, an international online money transfer service, which allows you to safely

transfer money through an Internet using various encryption techniques and provides

an alternative to other traditional payment methods like cheques, money orders, etc. It

have an active user base of over 100 million active users in 190 countries and

performs over 9 million payments daily. It is one of the popular medium of payment

over online auction sites like ebay etc. It is a convinient medium for trading

particularly of the buyers and sellers are from differnet countries and have different

currencies.

Romanion Hacker TinKode aka Razvan Cernaianu, explioted  a loophole in the code

of the chargeback process of PayPal. Due to this, a user can double its money en every

attempt. Suppose the user have Rs.1000, this using this loophole, the amount will be

doubled to Rs.2000 in the first attempt. Now this Rs. 2000 will be doubled to Rs. 4000

in the second attempt. Further Rs. 4000 will be doubled to Rs. 8000. Like wise this

process will continue endlessly.

40




2. In Australia, a website called MP3/WMA Land, which offers a large number of

pirated songs, music video clips for free download to its users. This resulted in heavy

financial losses to the artists and the producers of those songs. The complain was

loudeged by an organizations called Music Industry Piracy Investigations.

The owners of the website, Ng, Tran and Le, who were the students of Australian

University,  were framed for Australia‟s largest copyright infrigement case(Urbas,

2012).

3. One of the intresting case of online stalking was registered by Mrs. Ritu Kohli at Delhi

Police (Kaur, 2013). She reported that someone is using her identity over the Internet

in the website www.mirc.com for chatting, and distributed her address and phone

number. As a result she received a large number of phone calls from all over including

Dubai, Ahemdabad, Mumbai, etc. at odd hours. This caused a lot of mental frustration

and she decided to report the case. Based on her complain, Delhi Police tracced the IP

address and finally traced the address of accused, Manish Kathuria and arrested him.

A Dubai based NRI was blackmailed, and by the time the case was reported, he had

already approximatly 1.25 crore to the accused (Madhya Pradesh State Cyber Police,

2013). The NRI met a girl over Internet and after a series of long chatting sessions, the

girl won the love and trust of the NRI. In the meantime, she introduces him with

several of her friends. Due to some reasons, the relation could not last long.  After

some time, one of the girl‟s friend, who was introduced to him by the girl, reports him

that due to the mental stress of the broken relationship, the girl have commited sucide

and police is investigating the case. Many fake copies of the letters from CBI, High

Court of Calcutta, New York police and Punjab University etc. were also sent to the

NRI. The NRI seeked help from the girl‟s friend, who in turn introduced her with a

law firm based at Kolkata. The owner of the law firm agreed to take this case. A huge

some of money was demanded by the law firm and a total of more that 1.26 crore were

transfered on different occassions and he still demamded more money. The NRI smell

something fishy and reported the case to Mumbai Police. The NRI forwarded all the

email that he recieved from the girl, her friend and the owner of the law firm. After the

foransic invertigation for the email, the IP address of all the three persons were found

to be originated from the same source. After investigation, it was found that the

identity of the girl and her friends were all virtual i.e. they does not exist. The owner

of the law firm was the mastermind who assumed false identity of all the persons and

created this false story to blackmail the NRI.

41




4. Iran‟s necular facility at Natanz was attacked by virus, Stuxnet which is belived to be

developed by US (Shubert, 2011).  It was not possible to inject the virus though the

Internet as the network of the the Iran‟s necluer facility is a private network and was

isolated from rest of the world. The virus first infacted the third party utility which is

used by Natanz facility and gained assess to the network. The virus was designed to

attack a specfic system software which controls the operation of Siemens controllers.

The virus speeds up or slow down the centrifuges and thus wearing them out

prematurely. Moreover, it hijacked the system and send false signals about the health

and status of the necluer plant.  Therefore, by the time the effect of the virus was

detected, it was too late and the virus have done much harm to the neculear facility.

5. A trojen mail was used to hack the user name and the password of the  current account

of Mumbai based firm RPG Group and siphoned off Rs. 2.41 crore by Real Time

Gross Sattlement(RTGS) (Narayan, 2013). Th bank officials suspected when they

notice the huge amount of money transfer. They confirmed they same from the

companie‟s officials who denied the tranfer of the money to the designmated accounts.

Based on the names and the address of the of the  account holders who have received

the money, the police came to know that the account holders have permitted the main

accused to use their account in return of huge commission.

6. Chennai police cracked a case of credit card fraud, where two BPO employees with

the help of the son of the accused, increased the credit card limt and the

communication address of the credit card owner (Madhya Pradesh State Cyber Police,

2013). They illigally hacked into their company‟s computer to find out the details of

the credit card owner. They credit card company was cheated for about 7 lakhs before

the incident was noticed. Due to the chance of the communication address, the owner

of credit card could not receive montly statements genrerated at the month‟s end. The

case was register with the Chennai police. After the digital foransic investigation of

the BPO‟s compute system, it was found that its two employees have illegally access

to the computer to steel the customer record.

7.  A case of copyright infringment was loudged in Andhra Pradesh (Nandanwar, 2013).

A well known mobile serive operator company launched a promotional campain, in

which it offered a mobile phone at a very low cost to its customers with a lock-in

period of 3-years. The software of the phone was configured in such a way that, in the

lock-in period the sim of any other company cannot working with the handset. A

compititor of that company  lured the existing customers of the company which gave

42




the mobile phone to “unlocked” the phone by cracking the software of the mobile so

that any other sim can be used with the handset.  The company reported the crime and

the case were registered under copyright infringement u/s 63 of copyrights act.

8. A gang of criminals is active over the cyber space, which steels  the credit card data of

the cardholders from the POS at shopping malls, petrol pumps, resturents, hotels, etc.

and use these cards to book air tickets online. According to the reports, over 15000

credit cards were fraudulently used by these criminals to book online tickets which

account for approximatly Rs. 17 crore revenue loss. These criminals use public

infrastructure like cyber cafe, etc. to book these tickets so that it is difficult to trace

them.  The fraud came to the  notice when the customers who were charged for

booking an airticket and these customers reported at the card issuing banks claming

that these tickets were never booked by them.

9. In the year 2000, a worm known as Love Bug worm or VBS/Loveletter, which

specially target Windows operating system based computer system, caused damage

costing approx. Rs. 22,000 crore.  An spam mail containing “ILOVEYOU” in the

subject line and LOVE-LETTER-FOR-YOU.TXT.vbs as an attachment is received. If

the used clicked the attachment, the machine gets infacted and the worm start

searching all the drive of the computer and start currupting the files. It also start

forwarding the copies of the email to all the outlook contacts added in the addressbook

of the user. Nearly 10% machines connected to the Internet were infacted within no

time (Madhya Pradesh State Cyber Police, 2013).  Many large organizations which

includes British parliament, Pentagon have to shut down the email system to stop this

worm spreading into their network.

10. Online degree fraud are very popular these days over internet where accredited online

degrees are offered by fake Universities (Gollin, 2003). These diploma mills offer to

turn your work experience into a degree in exchange of money. The transcripts are

also issued to the students on the basis of self evaluation. Its only when the students is

rejected on account of fake degree, he realize that he fell pray to online fraud.

11.  Can you belive a fake tweet message can cost $136 billiion loss within seconds

(Fisher, 2013). The US stock markets crashed in response to a fake twitter message

send via hacked twitter account of Associated Press, USA which reported two

explosions in the White House and that President Barack Obama had been injured.

Later, Syrian Electronic Army, a terrorist group claimed responsibility on its own

Twitter feed for the AP hack. The hacking was performed by sending a phishing e-

43




mail. As soon as the link in the phishing e-mail was clicked, a spyware was installed

in the computer and the information stored in the system were sent to remote servers.

Using this information the account of AP was hacked and the hoax was created which

effected sentiments of the invester of NY Stock Exchange and resulted in heavy loss.

12. Recently a new virus, which infects the Point of Sale(POS) machines and steals the

payment record of credit card of the customers. These confidential data like PIN

codes, credit card numbers, expiration date, CCV number, etc. are tracked and sent to

the hackers so that this information can be misused for commiting financial frauds

(US-CERT, 2014).

13. The people with ill intentions are not only looking for your private and confidential

data, but are in search of your communication infrastructure so that your identity can

be used for hiding their identity so that they are not caught after creating neusence.

The terrorist outfit Indian Mujahideen(IM) used the unprotected wi-fi network of a

Mumbai based US citizen, Kenneth Haywood. They hacked his wi-fi network used

send an e-mail, which contains his IP address,  to a news agency just 5 minutes before

the Ahemdabad blast (Chowdhury, Nair, & Johnson, 2008).

14. The terrorist used open wi-fi network of Matunga's Khalsa College of Arts, Science

and Commerce, Mumbai to send a terror mail to media house (The Indian Express,

2008). The terrorists remotely access the router and deleted the system logs after using

the network so that it becomes difficult for the investigating to trace the origin of the

email.

15. Pune based software engineer, Asma Sandip Thorve was arrested by economic

offences wing of Pune police for illegally steeling source code of the software product

and other confidential information of Brainvisa Technologies due to which the

company lost Rs. 46.5 crores (Times of India, 2009).

16. There is a new type of crime evolving over internet where a prospective business

partner will offer you a homebased business oppourtinity with no investment and very

lucrative commission (Castillo, 2007). Once the person agrees to work with the

company, the prospective business partner will ask for the details like address, phone

numbers, photo identity, date of birth, etc. After some time, the person will receive

parcel at the address with repackging instructions along with the list of addresses

where these parcels are to be dispatched abroad. Actually these goods are purchased

using stolen credit cards and the goods are delivered at the address provided by the

person. The person will be held responsible if address of the delivery of the goods is

44




traced by the investigators. The real trouble begins when your commision arrives. It is

in the form of third party cheque and is of the higher amount then you expected. Some

days latter an instruction to return the excess amount electronically is received. Once

the excess fund is electonically transferred, the bank will discover that the cheque is

fake and the person will be help responsible for this act.

17. Some of the customers of ICICI bank were victim phishing attack (Nair, 2009). Some

of the customers received an email from a person who claimed to be an official of

ICICI bank. He asked the customers to update their account information using a link

which redirects the customers to a page which is very similler to ICICI bank‟s

webpage. The case was registered by the bank officials when this  fraud came to the

knowledge of the bank when some of the customers got suspecious and informed the

IT department of the bank to verify the source of such email. The bank officials were

suprized to find out that the website, which was very closely resembling the bank‟s

official website. If the customer used that link to update his account credentials by

logging into the fake website using their user id and the password, these details would

reached the hackers and they can later use this information to login into the customer‟s

account and transfer money aur pruchase goods online.

18. The cyber criminals have targeted the gas filling station in the US to skim the credit

card and debit card data. The hacker planted bluetooth enabled credit card skimmers in

most of the gas stations locted in the Southern United States. The customer data which

includes information like account number, PIN, CVV, etc eas used by the hackers to

withdraw more than $2 million from the ATM mostly located at Manhattan.

19. The hackers used the tools used by the law enforcement agencies to parse data from

iPhones to steel the private photographs of female celebreties in the US (Hazen,

2014).  The hackers are belived to be using software called Elcomsoft Phone Password

Breaker and iBrute to log into apple‟s site and download the backupfiles into their

machines.

20. There are many incidents were non- friendly countries launch cyber attacks to gain

access to the sensitive information. One such event is Russia is suspected for his

involvement in hacking of US financial system (Farberov, 2014). One of the leading

banks JPMorgan Chase was reported to be attacked by Russian hackers. The hackers

were successful in steeling the sensitive data from the bank‟s server.

21. Recently, a Chinese mobile company, Xiaomi was found guilty for sending the

sensitive data to Chinese servers (Kumar, 2014). This information includes sms,

45




photographs, contact list, etc. without the knowledge of the users. It‟s not the first time

that a Chinese company was help suspected for espionage and US government have

banned the use of Chinese equipments in some of its major establishments.





46




CYBER SECURITY INITIATIVES IN INDIA

5.1 INTRODUCTION

With the growth of internet, the dependence on computers has increased exponentially. The

challenge is to protect critical information infrastructure, like civil aviation sector, Railways‟

passenger reservation system and communication network, port management, companies and

organisations in power, oil and natural gas sectors, banking and finance, telecom sector, etc.

from cyber attacks. India is ranked fourth among the top 50 countries in terms of the number

of cyber crime complaints reported to the Internet Crime Complaint Centre (IC3), preceded

only by the US, Canada and the UK based on the 2014 IC3 annual report (The Telegraph,

2015).

Shortage of trained cyber security workforce is of serious concern to India. In comparison to

China, US and Russia that have 125000, 91080 and 7300 trained cyber experts respectively;

India has merely 556 cyber experts deployed in various government agencies (Joshi, 2013).

India is considered an IT superpower that is a major exporter of software and hosts major

ITES-based outsourced businesses. Therefore, IT constitutes a major share of Indian

economy. Recently, European Union has picked holes in India‟s data security system and

suggested that a joint expert group be set up to propose ways on how the country should

tighten measures for qualifying as a data secure nation (Sen, 2013). Therefore, India needs

look seriously into upgrading its Information Security infrastructure and reframe cyber

policies to get data secure status from EU. This is crucial for India to retain high-end

outsourced business, which has a potential of increasing from the existing $20 billion to $50

billion.

5.2 COUNTER CYBER SECURITY INTIATIVES IN INDIA

To counter cyber security attacks, Government of India have taken some initiatives which are

listed below:

1. National Counter Terrorism Center(NCTC): After 26/11 attack in 2008, suddenly

the Indian government realized the importance of Counter terrorism initiatives and

proposed National Counter Terrorism Center(NCTC) to provide intelligence inputs to

the decision makers to plan for counter terrorist activities. The NCTC is supposed to

coordinate between various State and Central govt. agencies and serve as a single and

47




effective point of control and coordination of all counter terrorism measures.  It is

modeled on the American NCTC and Britain‟s Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre and

will derive its powers from the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1967 (Mrunal,

2012).

2. National Information Security Assurance Programme (NISAP): To create the

awareness among the people in the government and critical sector organization,

CERT-In has taken an initiative called National Information Security Assurance

Programme (NISAP), to develop and implement information security policy and

information security best practices based on ISO/IEC 27001 for protection of their

infrastructure. CERT-in has established the facility for Computer Forensics for

investigation of cyber crimes and to provide hands on training to the law enforcement

agencies and judiciary. This infrastructure is being augmented to include network

forensics and mobile forensics investigation facility. CERT-In is cooperating with

defence, banks, judiciary and law enforcement agencies in training their officials as

well as extending the support in investigation of cyber crimes (Srinath, 2006).

3. Computer Emergency Response Team-India(CERT-In): The Indian Computer

Emergency Response Team was created in 2004 by Department  of  Information

Technology. The purpose of creating  CERT-In was to respond to computer security

incidents, report on vulnerabilities and promote effective IT security practices

throughout the country and is also responsible for overseeing administration of the IT

act (CERT-In, 2014).

4. Indo US Cyber Security Forum (IUSCSF): The India-US Cyber Security Forum

was established in 2001 and is dedicated to protecting the critical infrastructure of the

knowledge-based economy. The members of the forum are various government and

private sector organizations, both from India and the United States, working under the

Forum‟s auspices, have identified risks and common concerns in cyber security and

crafted an action-oriented work plan on securing networked information systems.

The Forum focuses on cyber-security, cyber-forensics and related research and works

towards enhancing co-operation among law enforcement agencies on both sides in

dealing with cyber crime. Defence services of both the countries will enhance their

interaction through exchange of experience in organizational, technological, and

procedural aspects. Ongoing co-operation between India‟s STQC and the US National

Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) will expand to new areas including

harmonization of standards.  CII and their US counterpart have decided to set up an

48




India Information Sharing and Analysis Centre (ISAC) and India Anti-Bot Alliance

(„bot‟ refers to software that can be tasked to invade computers and undertake

malicious activities remotely on behalf of hackers) (Press Information Bureau, 2006).

5. National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIPC) of

India: It is declared as a nodal agency for the protection of critical information

infrastructure of India and is responsible for all measures including R&D for

protection of critical information infrastructure. Some of the activities that NCIIPC

performs are (Chander, 2013):

a. Identification of Critical Sub-sectors

b. Study of Information Infrastructure of identified critical sub-sectors

c. Issue of Daily / Monthly cyber alerts / advisories

d. Malware Analysis

e. Tracking zombies and Malware spreading IPs

f. Cyber Forensics activities

g. Research and Development for Smart and Secure Environment.

h. Facilitate CII owners in adoption of appropriate policies, standards, best

practices for protection of CII.

i. Annual CISO Conference for Critical Sectors.

j. Awareness and training

k. 24X7 operation and helpdesk

6. National Intelligence Grid (Natgrid) project of India: It is the integrated

intelligence grid developed by C-DAC-Pune connecting databases of core

security agencies of the Government of India (C-DAC, 2014). It is a counter

terrorism measure that collects and collates a host of information from

government databases including tax and bank account details, credit card transactions,

visa and immigration records and itineraries of rail and air travel (Yasmeen, 2013).

This combined data will be made available to 11 central agencies, which are: Research

and Analysis Wing, the Intelligence Bureau, Central Bureau of

Investigation, Financial intelligence unit, Central Board of Direct Taxes, Directorate

of Revenue Intelligence,Enforcement Directorate, Narcotics Control Bureau, Central

Board of Excise and Customs and the Directorate General of Central Excise

Intelligence.

7. Crime and Criminal Tracking Networks and Systems (CCTNS) project of India:

It is a project under National e-Governance Plan(NeGP) covering all 28 States and 7

49




UTs which aims at creation of a nation-wide networking infrastructure for evolution of

IT-enabled sophisticated tracking system around 'investigation of crime and detection

of criminals (PTI, 2013). The goals of the CCTNS are to facilitate collection, storage,

retrieval, analysis, transfer and sharing of data and information at the police station

and between the police station and the State Headquarters and the Central Police

Organizations. CCTNS would provide a comprehensive database for crimes and

criminals, and it would be easier for the law enforcement agencies to track down a

criminal moving from one place to another.

8. National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC): National Cyber Coordination

Centre is a proposed cyber security and e-surveillance agency in India. It is intended

to screen communication metadata and co-ordinate the intelligence gathering activities

of other agencies. Some of the components of NCCC include a cyber attack

prevention strategy, cyber attack investigations and training, etc.

9. Botnet Cleaning Center: As a part of the Digital India programme, the Government

is setting up a centre that will detect malicious programmes like „botnets‟ and help

people remove such harmful softwares from their devices. “ The Government is

setting up „botnet‟ cleaning and malware analysis centre” according to media reports.

Botnet is a network of malicious software. It can steal information, take control of

device function and carry out cyber attacks like Distributed Denial-of-Service (DdoS).

10. E-mail policy of Government of India: In present date Email is considered to be as

the major source of communication between individuals and organization as well. The

same applies to Govt. of India (GOI) as well. E-mail has become major mode of

communications for the entire government. With the increasing use of Emails to

communicate among different Govt. Agencies, the Email Policy was laid down by

Government of India (GOI) in October 2013. Here we will cover some of the

important clause of policy, readers are advised to download policy from Department

of Electronics and IT website.

11. Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA): The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) is a

ministry of the Government of India. An interior ministry, it is mainly responsible for

the maintenance of internal security and domestic policy. Readers are adviced to read

annual report of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)

has multifarious responsibilities, the important among them being-internal security,

border management, CentreState relations, administration of Union Territories,

management of Central Armed Police Forces, disaster management, etc.

50




12. National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB): NCRB shall endeavour to empower

Indian Police with Information Technology and Criminal Intelligence to enable them

to effectively & efficiently enforce the law & improve public service delivery. This

shall be achieved through coordination with police forces at National & International

level, upgradation of crime analysis technology, developing IT capability & IT

enabled solutions.

13. Data Security Council of India (DSCI): Data Security Council of India (DSCI) is a

premier industry body on data protection in India, setup by NASSCOM, committed to

making the cyberspace safe, secure and trusted by establishing best practices,

standards and initiatives in cyber security and privacy. DSCI brings together national

governments and their agencies, industry sectors including IT-BPM, BFSI, Telecom,

industry associations, data protection authorities and think tanks for public advocacy,

thought leadership, capacity building and outreach initiatives.  To further its

objectives, DSCI engages with governments, regulators, industry associations and

think tanks on policy matters. To strengthen thought leadership in cyber security and

privacy, DSCI develops best practices and frameworks, publishes studies, surveys and

papers. It builds capacity in security, privacy and cyber forensics through training and

certification program for professionals and law enforcement agencies and engages

stakeholders through various outreach initiatives including events, awards, chapters,

consultations and membership programs. DSCI also endeavours to increase India‟s

share in the global security product and services market through global trade

development initiatives. These aim to strengthen the security and privacy culture in

the India.







51




GUIDELINES FOR SECURE PASSWORD, TWO STEP
VERIFICATION AND USING FREE ANTIVIRUS

6.1 GENERATING SECURE PASSWORD

6.1.1 Guideline for setting secure Password10
Choosing the right password is something that many people find difficult, there are so many

things that require passwords these days that remembering them all can be a real problem.

Perhaps because of this a lot of people choose their passwords very badly. The simple tips

below are intended to assist you in choosing a good password.

Basics

 Use at least eight characters, the more characters the better really, but most people will

find anything more than about 15 characters difficult to remember.

 Use a random mixture of characters, upper and lower case, numbers, punctuation,

spaces and symbols.

 Don't use a word found in a dictionary, English or foreign.

 Never use the same password twice.

Things to avoid

 Don't just add a single digit or symbol before or after a word. e.g. "apple1"

 Don't double up a single word. e.g. "appleapple"

 Don't simply reverse a word. e.g. "elppa"

 Don't just remove the vowels. e.g. "ppl"

 Key sequences that can easily be repeated. e.g. "qwerty","asdf" etc.

 Don't just garble letters, e.g. converting e to 3, L or i to 1, o to 0. as in "z3r0-10v3"

Tips

 Choose a password that you can remember so that you don't need to keep looking

it up, this reduces the chance of somebody discovering where you have written it

down.

 Choose a password that you can type quickly, this reduces the chance of somebody

discovering your password by looking over your shoulder.

Bad Passwords


10

 http://www.lockdown.co.uk/?pg=password_guide

52




 Don't use passwords based on personal information such as: name, nickname,

birthdate, wife's name, pet's name, friends name, home town, phone number, social

security number, car registration number, address etc. This includes using just part of

your name, or part of your birthdate.

 Don't use passwords based on things located near you. Passwords such as "computer",

"monitor", "keyboard", "telephone", "printer", etc. are useless.

 Don't ever be tempted to use one of those oh so common passwords that are easy to

remember but offer no security at all. e.g. "password", "letmein".

 Never use a password based on your username, account name, computer name or

email address.

Choosing a password

 Use good password generator software.

 Use the first letter of each word from a line of a song or poem.

 Alternate between one consonant and one or two vowels to produce nonsense words.

eg. "taupouti".

 Choose two short words and concatenate them together with a punctuation or symbol

character between the words. eg. "seat%tree"

Changing your password

 You should change your password regularly, I suggest once a month is reasonable for

most purposes.

 You should also change your password whenever you suspect that somebody knows it,

or even that they may guess it, perhaps they stood behind you while you typed it in.

 Remember, don't re-use a password.

Protecting your password

 Never store your password on your computer except in an encrypted form. Note that

the password cache that comes with windows (.pwl files) is NOT secure, so whenever

windows prompts you to "Save password" don't.

 Don't tell anyone your password, not even your system administrator

 Never send your password via email or other unsecured channel

 Yes, write your password down but don't leave the paper lying around, lock the paper

away somewhere, preferably off-site and definitely under lock and key.

 Be very careful when entering your password with somebody else in the same room.

53




Remembering your password

Remembering passwords is always difficult and because of this many people are tempted to

write them down on bits of paper. As mentioned above this is a very bad idea. So what can

you do?

 Use a secure password manager, see the downloads page for a list of a few that won't

cost you anything.

 Use a text file encrypted with a strong encryption utility.

 Choose passwords that you find easier to remember.

Bad Examples

 "fred8" - Based on the users name, also too short.

 "christine" - The name of the users girlfriend, easy to guess

 "kciredref" - The users name backwords

 "indescribable" - Listed in a dictionary

 "iNdesCribaBle" - Just adding random capitalisation doesn't make it safe.

 "gandalf" - Listed in word lists

 "zeolite" - Listed in a geological dictionary

 "qwertyuiop" - Listed in word lists

 "merde!" - Listed in a foreign language dictionary

Good Examples

None of these good examples are actually good passwords, that's because they've been

published here and everybody knows them now, always choose your own password don't just

use somebody elses.

 "mItWdOtW4Me" - Monday is the worst day of the week for me.

How would a potential hacker get hold of my password anyway?

There are four main techniques hackers can use to get hold of your password:

54




1. Steal it. That means looking over your should when you type it, or finding the paper

where you wrote it down. This is probably the most common way passwords are

compromised, thus it's very important that if you do write your password down you

keep the paper extremely safe. Also remember not to type in your password when

somebody could be watching.

2. Guess it. It's amazing how many people use a password based on information that can

easily be guessed. Psychologists say that most men use 4 letter obscenities as

passwords and most women use the names of their boyfriends, husbands or children.

3. A brute force attack. This is where every possible combination of letters, numbers

and symbols in an attempt to guess the password. While this is an extremely labour

intensive task, with modern fast processors and software tools this method is not to be

underestimated. A Pentium 100 PC might typically be able to try 200,000

combinations every second this would mean that a 6 character password containing

just upper and lower case characters could be guessed in only 27½ hours.

4. A dictionary attack. A more intelligent method than the brute force attack described

above is the dictionary attack. This is where the combinations tried are first chosen

from words available in a dictionary. Software tools are readily available that can try

every word in a dictionary or word list or both until your password is found.

Dictionaries with hundreds of thousands of words, as well as specialist, technical and

foreign language dictionaries are available, as are lists of thousands of words that are

often used as passwords such as "qwerty", "abcdef" etc.

6.2 USING PASSWORD MANAGER11

We use passwords to ensure security and the confidentiality of our data. One of the biggest

modern day crimes is identity theft, which is easily accomplished when passwords are

compromised. The need of the hour is good password management.  Have you ever thought

of an alternative to remembering your passwords and not repeatedly entering your login

credentials? Password managers are one of the best ways to store, back up and manage your

passwords. A good password is hard to remember and that‟s where a password manager


11

 http://opensourceforu.efytimes.com/2015/01/peek-top-password-managers/

55




comes in handy. It encrypts all the different passwords that are saved with a master password,

the only one you have to remember.

6.2.1 What is a password manager?
A password manager is software that helps a user to manage passwords and important

information so that it can be accessed any time and anywhere. An excellent password

manager helps to store information securely without compromising safety. All the passwords

are saved using some kind of encryption so that they become difficult for others to exploit.

6.2.2 Why you should use it?
If you find it hard to remember passwords for every website and don‟t want to go through the

„Forgot password?‟ routine off and on, then a password manager is what you are looking for.

These are designed to store all kinds of critical login information related to different websites.

6.2.3 How does it work?
Password managers may be stored online or locally. Online password managers store

information in an online cloud, which can be accessed any time from anywhere. Local

password managers store information on the local server, which makes them less accessible.

Both have their own advantages, and the manager you use would depend on your need.

Online password managers use browser extensions that keep data in a local profile, syncing

with a cloud server. Some other password managers use removable media to save the

password so that you can carry it with you and don‟t have to worry about online issues. Both

these options can also be combined and used as two-factor authentication so that data is even

more secure.

6.2.4 Some popular Password managers
The passwords are saved using different encryptions based on the services that the companies

provide. The best password managers use a 256-bit (or more) encryption protocol for better

security, which has been accepted by the US National Security Agency for top secret

information handling. If you have considered using a password manager and haven‟t decided

on one, this section features the top five.

1. KeePassX: KeePassX is an open source, cross-platform and light weight password

management application published under the terms of the GNU General Public

License. It was built based on the Qt Libraries. KeePassX stores information about

user names, passwords and other login information in a secure database. KeePassX

uses its own random password generator, which makes it easier to create strong

56




passwords for better security. It also includes a powerful and quick search tool with

which a keyword of a website can be used to find login credentials that have been

stored in the database. It allows users to customise groups, making it more user

friendly. KeePassX is not limited to storing only usernames and passwords but also

free-form notes and any kind of confidential text files.





Figure 9: KeePassX



Features

 Simple user interface: The left pane tree structure makes it easy to distinguish

between different groups and entries, while the right pane shows more detailed

information.

 Portable media access: Its portability makes it easy to use since there‟s no need to

install it on every computer.

 Search function: Searches in the complete database or in every group.

 Auto fill: There‟s no need to type in the login credentials; the application does it

whenever the Web page is loaded. This keeps it secure from key loggers.

 Password generator: This feature helps to generate strong passwords that make it

difficult for dictionary attacks. It can be customised.

 Two factor authentication: It enables the user to either unlock the database by a

master password or by a key from a removable drive.

 Adds attachments: Any type of confidential document can be added to the

database as an attachment, which allows users to secure not just passwords.

57




 Cross-platform support: It works on all supported platforms. KeePassX is an open

source application, so its source code can be compiled and used for any operating

system.

  Security: The password database is encrypted with either the AES encryption or

the Twofish algorithm, which uses 256-bit key encryption.

 Expiration date: The entries can be expired, based on a user defined date.

 Import and export of entries: Entries: from PwManager or Kwallet can be

imported, and entries can be exported as text files.

 Multi-language support: It supports 15 languages.

2. Clipperz: Clipperz is a Web-based, open source password manager built to store login

information securely. Data can be accessed from anywhere and from any device

without any installation. Clipperz also includes an offline version when an Internet

connection is not available.



Figure 10: Clipperz



Features

 Direct login: Automatically logs in to any website without typing login

credentials, with just one click.

 Offline data: With one click, an encrypted local copy of the data can be created as

a HTML page.

 No installation: Since it‟s a Web-based application, it doesn‟t require any

installation and can be accessed from any compatible browser.

58




 Data import: Login data can be imported from different supported password

managers.

 Security: The database is encrypted using JavaScript code on the browser and then

sent to the website. It requires a passphrase to decrypt the database without which

data cannot be accessed.

 Support: Works on any operating system with a major browser that has JavaScript

enabled.

3. Password Gorilla: Password Gorilla is an open source, cross-platform, simple

password manager and personal vault that can store login information and notes.

Password Gorilla is a Tcl/Tk application that runs on Linux, Windows and Mac OS X.

Login information is stored in the database, which can be accessed only using a master

password. The passwords are SHA256 protected and the database is encrypted using

the Twofish algorithm. The key stretching feature makes it difficult for brute force

attacks.





Figure 11: Password Gorilla



Features

 Portable: Designed to run on a compatible computer without being installed.

 Import of database: Can import the password database saved in the CSV format.

 Locks the database when idle: It automatically locks the database when the

computer is idle for a specific period of time.

 Security: It uses the Twofish algorithm to encrypt the database.

 Can copy credentials: Keyboard shortcuts can be used to copy login credentials to

the clipboard.

59




 Auto clear: This feature clears the clipboard after a specified time.

 Organises groups: Groups and sub-groups can be created to organise passwords for

different websites.

4. Gpassword Manager: Gpassword Manager is a simple, lightweight and cross-

platform utility for managing and accessing passwords. It is published under the terms

of the Apache License. It allows users to securely store passwords/URLs in the

database. The added entries can be marked as favourites, which then can be accessed

by right-clicking the system tray icon. The passwords and other login information

shown in the screen can be kept hidden based on user preferences.



Figure 12: Gpassword manager

Features

 Access to favourite sites: A list of favourite Web pages can be accessed

quickly from the convenient „tray‟ icon.

 Quick fill: Passwords and other information can be clicked and dragged onto

forms for quick filling out.

 Search bar: The quick search bar allows users to search passwords that are

needed.

 Password generator: Passwords with user-defined options can be generated

with just a click.

 Quick launch: Favourite websites can be launched by right-clicking the tray

icon.

5. Password Safe: Password Safe is a simple and free open source application initiated

by Bruce Schneier and released in 2002. Now Password Safe is hosted on

60




SourceForge and developed by a group of volunteers. It‟s well known for its ease of

use. It is possible to organise passwords based on user preference, which makes it easy

for the user to remember. The whole database backup and a recovery option are

available for ease of use. Passwords are kept hidden, making it difficult for shoulder

surfing. Password Safe is licensed under the Artistic licence.



Figure 13: Password Safe



Features

 Ease of use: The GUI is very simple, enabling even a beginner to use it.

 Multiple databases: It supports multiple databases. And different databases can be

created for each category.

 Safe decryption: The decryption of the password database is done in the RAM,

which leaves no trace of the login details in the hard drive.

 Password generator: Supports the generation of strong, lengthy passwords.

 Advanced search: The advanced search function allows users to search within the

different fields.

 Security: Uses the Twofish algorithm to encrypt the database.

61




6.3 ENABLING TWO-STEP VERIFICATION12

Every day, tens of thousands of personal accounts are hacked. Personal information is

compromised, passwords are cracked, and lives are put in jeopardy. If you ever use one

password for multiple accounts, you are exponentially increasing your vulnerability to being


hacked. Thankfully, Google has launched its 2-step verification system: anytime an unknown

device is used to sign into your Google account, the user has to provide a verification code in


addition to the password.  So it's not enough for hackers to just get your password; they'll also

need physical control of your phone or computer to access your account.

Step 1:  Sign into your Gmail account. Click on a thumbnail of your avatar on the right side

of the top menu bar, and then click "Account" to update your settings.



Figure 14: Account setting

Step 2: You will land on your Account Settings page. Scroll down until you find a blue bar

that says "signing in".



Figure 15: Signing in


12

 http://www.wikihow.com/Set-up-2-Step-Verification-in-Gmail available under an Attribution-
Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Creative Commons License

62




Step 3: In the 2-step verification section, you'll see if you already have 2-step verification

turned on. If it says "OFF," click "Edit" to set the feature up.



13
Figure 16: Turning on ywo steps verification

Step 4: You'll see a page that briefly walks through the steps of setting up 2-step

verification. Hover over the steps for more detail. Once you're ready, click "Start setup."



Figure 17: Start setup

Step 5: Type in your cell phone number. This will be the phone associated with your Google

account. Anytime you sign into your Google account from an unknown device (e.g., a public


13

 Image courtesy: Figure 14 to 30 are adopted from http://www.wikihow.com/Set-up-2-Step-Verification-in-
Gmail available under an Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Creative Commons License.

63




computer), Google will send a verification code to your phone and you will need to enter that

before you can sign in.



Figure 18: Entering mobile number for verification

Step 6: Select whether you'd like to receive a text message or Google Voice call with your

verification code. Press submit. Then wait for the code to arrive to your phone and enter it in.



Figure 19: Entering varification code

64




Step 7: Decide whether to trust this device. If you are turning on 2-step verification from a

personal computer or trusted device, check the "trust this device" box. You will only be asked

to enter a verification code when you sign into this account once per 30 days.





Figure 20: Setting up trust setting of the computer

Step 8: Press OK, and you have just set up 2-step verification for your Google account! Skip

any additional steps that seem unfamiliar or confusing for now -- we will address all of them

in successive sections of this article.

65






Figure 21: Confirmation

Step 9: Print a list of backup verification codes and store it in a secure but accessible place,

like your wallet. If you ever need to sign into your Google account but don't have your

primary phone with you, you can enter one of these codes instead.

 Go to your 2-step verification settings page.

 Under "How to receive codes," click on the "Show backup codes" link. Print

this page.



Figure 22: Saving the page

Method 1 of 2: Application-Specific Passwords

66






Figure 23: Setting up application specific password

Step 1: Understand the need for application-specific passwords. With 2-step verification,

Google has you covered every time you sign into your account from a web browser.

However, if you use your Google account with other applications, such as Microsoft Outlook

or a mobile device's mail application, those systems cannot ask you for a verification code.

Therefore, you will need to sign into those systems once with an application-specific

password. You will only need to re-enter an application-specific password if you choose to

reset it and generate a new one for that device.



Figure 24: Genrating app password

67




Step 2:  Generate application-specific passwords for your devices. Go to your 2-step

verification settings page or click "Edit" next to 2-step verification on the Security Account

Settings page (steps 1-3 above). Scroll down and click on "Manage application-specific

passwords."



Figure 25: Managing application specific passwords

Step 3: At the top of the page, you will see a list of sites, applications and devices to which

you have granted some level of access to your account. If you allowed a third-party website

(e.g., LinkedIn, Twitter, Foursquare) to comb your Gmail Contacts to find friends, for

example, you will see that listed. If you use other Google applications, you will also see those

listed. Feel free to revoke access to any site or program you no longer wish to use.



Figure 26: Configuring applications

68




Step 4:  Scroll down to the field at the bottom for entering the name of a device. Enter in

something that will help you remember what this application-specific password is for -- e.g.,

Mail App on iPhone, Google App on iPhone, Chrome Sync, Outlook, Thunderbird, or

whatever describes your application. Click "Generate password". You should generate a new

application-specific password for each application.



Figure 27: Generating app password

Step 5: Open up the application. Go to the settings page where you enter in your Google

Account information. Type in your Google account name as usual. Now instead of your

account password, type in the application-specific password in the password field. You have

now granted this application full access to your Google account. You will only need to enter

this password once. There is no need to write it down or memorize it, and it will not be

displayed by Google again.

69






Figure 28: Testing the password

Step 6:  Click "Done" on your web browser once you have successfully entered the

application-specific password.



Figure 29: Revoke the password

Step 7: Know how to revoke an app's access to your Gmail account. If you don't want to use

an app anymore, or you lost your phone and want to stop anyone who has it from accessing

your Gmail, simply click on the "Revoke" button in your application-specific password

settings page.

70






Figure 30: Generating password for andriod phone

Step 8: Create new application-specific passwords for each application that you connect your

Google Account to! This means if you sync your Google Account to two mail apps and a chat

client, you should have three application-specific passwords.

Method 2 of 2: If You Lose Your Phone

If you lose your phone and have 2-step verification turned on, you can still access your Gmail

account. You also can and should follow these steps to stop strangers from gaining access to

your Google accounts.

Step 1: Revoke your current application-specific passwords. If you have a smartphone with

apps linked to your Google account, they will automatically be signed out. When you get a

new phone, you can generate new application-specific passwords (see previous section) and

enter them into your new devices.

Step 2: Change your Gmail password. Even if someone else has your verification code, they

can't get into your Gmail account without your new password. While it's unlikely that the

person who has your phone also has cracked your Gmail password, you can never be too sure.

If you are logged into Google from any web browser on your mobile device, you'll now also

automatically be signed out.

Step 3: Add a backup phone number if you have a second mobile device. Go to your2-step

verification settings page and click "Add a phone number" in the "Backup phones" section.

71




Step 4: If you don't have a backup phone, use your list of printable backup codes to access

your account. On your 2-step verification settings page, click "Show backup codes". If you

haven't done so already, print out this page and keep it in a safe but accessible place -- such as

your wallet.

Step 5: If you get phone and change your phone number, be sure to revoke access to your

previous number on the 2-step verification settings page.

14
6.4 SECURING COMPUTER USING FREE ANTIVIRUS

As computers become more and more integrated in to our lives, we end up leaving many

sensitive data on our computer-from passwords, official email id, bank account to personal

notes, business plans and other confidential information. So, good security software is a must

for everyone. Here is a list of 11 free anti-virus software and its common features which you

can select (home users) for your online security. All are listed in alphabetical order

1. Avast Antivirus– Avast is one of the best free anti-virus software available that provides a

complete protection against security threats. This full-featured antivirus package has the

following feature: Built in Anti-spyware, Anti-Rootkit, Web shield, Strong self protection,

P2P and IM shield, Anti-Virus kernel, resident protection, Network shield, Automatic update,

System integration, Windows 64 bit support, Integrated Virus Cleaner. It can be downloaded

from https://www.avast.com/index

2. AVG Antivirus – AVG anti-virus free edition provides basic antivirus and anti-spyware

protection for Windows. Following features included in the free edition: Anti-virus , anti-

spyware and Safe surf feature. It can be downloaded from http://free.avg.com/

3. Avira AntiVir Personal - Avira is a comprehensive, easy to use antivirus program,

designed to reliable free of charge virus protection to home-users. Features included are:

Protection from virus worms and Trojans, Anti-rootkit, Anti-fishing, Anti dialers. It can be

downloaded from http://www.free-av.com/

4. BitDefender - Free Edition uses the same ICSA Labs certified scanning engines found in

Pro version of BitDefender , allowing you to enjoy basic virus protection for no cost at all.

Features includes: On demand Virus Scanner and Remover and Scheduled scanning. It can be

downloaded from http://www.bitdefender.com/PRODUCT-14-en--BitDefender-Free-

Edition.html


14

 http://shaifulaueo.blogspot.in/p/free-antivirus_13.html

72




5. Blink Personal – An all-in one security suite with antivirus limited for one year. Blink

personal Security suite features – Antivirus and Anti spyware, Anti root kit, Built-in Firewall

protection and Identity protection. It can be downloaded from http://free-antivirus.eeye.com/

6. Calmwin antivirus–An open source, free Antivirus program for Windows

98/Me/2000/XP/2003 and Vista. Features include - high detection rates for viruses and

spyware; automatic downloads of regularly updated Virus Database, Standalone virus

scanner. It does not include an on-access real-time scanner. It can be downloaded from

http://www.clamwin.com/

7. Comodo Antivirus - has all the functionality of a paid AV without the price – Features

includes- Detects and remove viruses from computers and networks. On Access Scanning

conducts a real-time, scheduled virus scan. Host Intrusion Detection allows you to Intercept

viruses, spyware, and other malware before they infect your computer.Get updates of the

latest virus definitions everyday so you can stay protected against the latest threats. It can be

downloaded from http://antivirus.comodo.com/

8. Moon Secure Antivirus - Aims to be the best Free Antivirus for Windows under GPL

license. It offers multiple scan engines, Net shield, Firewall, On access, on Exec scanner and

rootkits preventions plus features from Commercial Antivirus applications. It can be

downloaded from http://sourceforge.net/projects/moonav/

9. PCTools Antivirus- with PC Tools AntiVirus Free Edition you are protected against the

most nefarious cyber-threats attempting to gain access to your PC and personal information. It

protects you fromVirus, worm, Trojan and has Smart Updates, IntelliGuard Protection, file

guard and email guard. It can be downloaded from http://www.pctools.com/free-antivirus/

10. Rising Antivirus – Rising Antivirus Free Edition is a solution with no cost to personal

users for the life of the product while still provides the same level of detection and protection

capability as RISING Antivirus . It protects your computers against all types of viruses,

Trojans, worms, rootkits and other malicious programs. Ease of use and Smartupdate

technology make it an "install and forget" product and entitles you to focus on your own jobs

with your computer. It can be downloaded from http://www.freerav.com/

11. Threatfire Lite – Provides Comprehensive protection against viruses, worms, Trojans,

spyware, rootkits, keyloggers & buffer overflows. And have Real-time behavior-based

malware detection, malware quarantine & removal, etc. It can be downloaded from

http://www.threatfire.com/download/



73




ACTIVITY

1. Compare the feature of some of the popular free antiviruses.

2. What is the difference between free antivirus and paid antivirus? Is it safe to use free

      antivirus in your machine?

3. Use the guidelines to for generating secure passwords and evaluate whether your current

     passwords can be considered as safe or unsafe passwords.

4. Based on the above guidelines, change your unsafe passwords to safe ones.

5. Find out some popular password managers and evaluate them based on their

     characteristics‟.

6. Based on the above comparison, choose one of the best password managers for yourself.

7. Create two step verification for your Gmail account.

8. Find out how many sites, other than Gmail provide two steps verification.



RECOMENDED VIDEOS

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WprjZyY8ZuY

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mYhJyVKjai4

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MFyPg2Flf8s

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iNWUtj9qhPo

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A9O0zYv-5d0

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cdRbvO_MXh4

https://youtu.be/Xhmae4_fG2o

https://youtu.be/COU5T-Wafa4

https://youtu.be/cUH3tQbGj4A

https://youtu.be/hYyWgPXfx9U



74




Configuring Firewall in your computer

7.1 CONFIGURING FIREWALL ON MAC COMPUTER15

Every Mac ships with a built-in firewall - a service that can be configured to disallow

information from entering your Mac. But what is a firewall, and why do you need to use it on

your Mac?

Every time you request information from the Internet, such as a web page or email message,

your Mac sends data packets to request the information. Servers receive the packets, and then

send other packets back to your Mac. This all happens in a matter of seconds. Once your Mac

has reassembled the packets, you'll see something, like an email message or web page.



Figure 31: Firewall

A firewall can help prevent bad packets from entering your Mac. Hackers love to run

automated applications that can scan thousands of computers (including your Mac) for open

ports that can be exploited. To ensure that random individuals do not gain unauthorized

access to your Mac, you should enable Mac OS X's built-in firewall. It will close your Mac's

open ports and disallow random network scans.

7.1.1 Turning on and Configuring the Mac OS X Firewall
Here's how to turn on and configure your Mac's built-in firewall:

1. From the Apple menu, select System Preferences. The window shown below appears.


15

 Content and image courtesy(figure 31 to 35):  http://www.macinstruct.com/node/165 available under Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License

75






Figure 32: System preference dashboard

2. Select Security & Privacy.

3. Click the Firewall tab.

4. Click the lock icon and authenticate with your administrator username and password.

The window shown below appears.



Figure 33: Security and privacy dashboard

5. Click Start. The firewall turns on - you'll know it's enabled when you see the green

light and the Firewall: On message, as shown below.

76






Figure 34: Turning on firewall

6. Click Advanced. The window shown below appears.



Figure 35: Configuring firewall

7. Select the Automatically allow signed software to receive incoming connections

checkbox. This allows the applications on your Mac to communicate with the outside

world.

8. Select the Enable stealth mode checkbox. This prevents your Mac from responding

to port scans and ping requests.

9. Click OK to close the Advanced settings.

10. Close System Preferences. Your Mac is now protected by the built-in firewall!

77




7.2 WORKING WITH WINDOWS FIREWALL IN

WINDOWS716


7.2.1 Firewall in Windows 7
Windows 7 comes with two firewalls that work together. One is the Windows Firewall, and

the other is Windows Firewall with Advanced Security (WFAS). The main difference

between them is the complexity of the rules configuration. Windows Firewall uses simple

rules that directly relate to a program or a service. The rules in WFAS can be configured

based on protocols, ports, addresses and authentication. By default, both firewalls come with

predefined set of rules that allow us to utilize network resources. This includes things like

browsing the web, receiving e-mails, etc. Other standard firewall exceptions are File and

Printer Sharing, Network Discovery, Performance Logs and Alerts, Remote

Administration, Windows Remote Management, Remote Assistance, Remote

Desktop, Windows Media Player, Windows Media Player Network Sharing Service.

With firewall in Windows 7 we can configure inbound and outbound rules. By default, all

outbound traffic is allowed, and inbound responses to that traffic are also allowed. Inbound

traffic initiated from external sources is automatically blocked.

Sometimes we will see a notification about a blocked program which is trying to access

network resources. In that case we will be able to add an exception to our firewall in order to

allow traffic from the program in the future.

Windows 7 comes with some new features when it comes to firewall. For example, "full-

stealth" feature blocks other computers from performing operating system fingerprinting. OS

fingerprinting is a malicious technique used to determine the operating system running on the

host machine. Another feature is "boot-time filtering". This features ensures that the firewall

is working at the same time when the network interface becomes active, which was not the

case in previous versions of Windows.

When we first connect to some network, we are prompted to select a network location. This

feature is known as Network Location Awareness (NLA). This feature enables us to assign a

network profile to the connection based on the location. Different network profiles contain

different collections of firewall rules. In Windows 7, different network profiles can be


16

 Contents and image courtesy( Figure 31 o 43):http://www.digitalcitizen.life/gain-additional-control-using-
windows-firewall-advanced-security available under Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share
Alike 4.0 International.

78




configured on different interfaces. For example, our wired interface can have different profile

than our wireless interface. There are three different network profiles available:

 Public

 Home/Work - private network

 Domain - used within a domain

We choose those locations when we connect to a network. We can always change the location

in the Network and Sharing Center, in Control Panel. The Domain profile can be

automatically assigned by the NLA service when we log on to an Active Directory

domain. Note that we must have administrative rights in order to configure firewall in

Windows 7.

7.2.2 Configuring Windows Firewall
To open Windows Firewall we can go to Start > Control Panel > Windows Firewall.



Figure 36: Control pandel dashboard on Windows machine

By default, Windows Firewall is enabled for both private (home or work) and public

networks. It is also configured to block all connections to programs that are not on the list of

allowed programs. To configure exceptions we can go to the menu on the left and select

"Allow a program or feature trough Windows Firewall" option.

79






Figure 37: Configuring firewall setting

Exceptions

To change settings in this window we have to click the "Change settings" button. As you can

see, here we have a list of predefined programs and features that can be allowed to

communicate on private or public networks. For example, notice that the Core Networking

feature is allowed on both private and public networks, while the File and Printer Sharing is

only allowed on private networks. We can also see the details of the items in the list by

selecting it and then clicking the Details button.



Figure 38: Setting exceptions



80




Details

If we have a program on our computer that is not in this list, we can manually add it by

clicking on the "Allow another program" button.



Figure 39: Selecting programs not present in the list

Add a Program

Here we have to browse to the executable of our program and then click the Add button.

Notice that we can also choose location types on which this program will be allowed to

communicate by clicking on the "Network location types" button.



Figure 40: Adding a program



81




Network Locations

Many applications will automatically configure proper exceptions in Windows Firewall when

we run them. For example, if we enable streaming from Media Player, it will automatically

configure firewall settings to allow streaming. The same thing is if we enable Remote

Desktop feature from the system properties window. By enabling Remote Desktop feature we

actually create an exception in Windows Firewall.

Windows Firewall can be turned off completely. To do that we can select the "Turn Windows

Firewall on or off" option from the menu on the left.



Figure 41: Customize settings

Firewall Customization

Note that we can modify settings for each type of network location (private or public).

Interesting thing here is that we can block all incoming connections, including those in the list

of allowed programs.

Windows Firewall is actually a Windows service. As you know, services can be stopped and

started. If the Windows Firewall service is stopped, the Windows Firewall will not work.



Figure 42: Enabling firewall from Windows services

Firewall Service

82




In our case the service is running. If we stop it, we will get a warning that we should turn on

our Windows Firewall.



Figure 43: Firewall notification

Warning

Remember that with Windows Firewall we can only configure basic firewall settings, and this

is enough for most day-to-day users. However, we can't configure exceptions based on ports

in Windows Firewall any more. For that we have to use  Windows Firewall with Advanced

Security, which will be covered in next section.

17
7.2.3 How to Start & Use the Windows Firewall with Advanced Security
The Windows Firewall with Advanced Security is a tool which gives you detailed control over

the rules that are applied by the Windows Firewall. You can view all the rules that are used by

the Windows Firewall, change their properties, create new rules or disable existing ones. In

this tutorial we will share how to open the Windows Firewall with Advanced Security, how to

find your way around it and talk about the types of rules that are available and what kind of

traffic they filter.

7.2.3.1 How to Access the Windows Firewall with Advanced Security
You have several alternatives to opening the Windows Firewall with Advanced Security:

One is to open the standard Windows Firewall window, by going to "Control Panel -> System

and Security -> Windows Firewall". Then, click or tap Advanced settings.




17

 http://www.digitalcitizen.life/gain-additional-control-using-windows-firewall-advanced-security

83




In Windows 7, another method is to search for the word firewall in the Start Menu search box

and click the "Windows Firewall with Advanced Security" result.



In Windows 8.1, Windows Firewall with Advanced Security is not returned in search results

and you need to use the first method shared above for opening it.

The Windows Firewall with Advanced Security looks and works the same both in Windows 7

and Windows 8.1. To continue our tutorial, we will use screenshots that were made in

Windows 8.1.







7.2.3.2 What Are The Inbound & Outbound Rules?
In order to provide the security you need, the Windows Firewall has a standard set of inbound

and outbound rules, which are enabled depending on the location of the network you are

84




connected to. Inbound rules are applied to the traffic that is coming from the network and the

Internet to your computer or device. Outbound rules apply to the traffic from your computer

to the network or the Internet.

These rules can be configured so that they are specific to: computers, users, programs,

services, ports or protocols. You can also specify to which type of network adapter (e.g.

wireless, cable, virtual private network) or user profile it is applied to.

In the Windows Firewall with Advanced Security, you can access all rules and edit their

properties. All you have to do is click or tap the appropriate section in the left-side panel.



The rules used by the Windows Firewall can be enabled or disabled. The ones which are

enabled or active are marked with a green check-box in the Name column. The ones that are

disabled are marked with a gray check-box.

If you want to know more about a specific rule and learn its properties, right click on it and

select Properties or select it and press Properties in the column on right, which lists the

actions that are available for your selection.



85




In the Properties window, you will find complete information about the selected rule, what it

does and in when it is applied. You will also be able to edit its properties and change any of

the available parameters.



7.2.3.3 What Are The Connection Security Rules?
Connection security rules are used to secure traffic between two computers while it crosses

the network. One example would be a rule which defines that connections between two

specific computers must be encrypted.

Unlike the inbound or outbound rules, which are applied only to one computer, connection

security rules require that both computers have the same rules defined and enabled.

If you want to see if there are any such rules on your computer, click or tap "Connection

Security Rules" on the panel on the left. By default, there are no such rules defined on

Windows computers and devices. They are generally used in business environments and such

rules are set by the network administrator.



86






7.2.3.4 What Does the Windows Firewall with Advanced Security Monitor?
The Windows Firewall with Advanced Security includes some monitoring features as well. In

the Monitoring section you can find the following information: the firewall rules that are

active (both inbound and outbound), the connection security rules that are active and whether

there are any active security associations.



You should note that the Monitoring section shows only the active rules for the current

network location. If there are rules which get enabled for other network locations, you will

not see them in this section.

The above section discussed on how to setup a firewall on two Operating Systems viz.

Windows and Mac.  Linux have many varients therefore it is not possible to discuss how to

configure firewall on Linux. There are some links in the Recommended Videos section which

discuss the procedure of setting up firewall in various varient of Linux.

Activity

1. Setup  and configure a firewall in your system.

2. Find some some of the free and commercially available firewalls over internet.

RECOMENDED VIDEOS

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=krbivwp4t3U

87




https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H0g8xJMnT68

For linux

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hkzHtEnFZpc

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o0a09CQi_48

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wbzP2-qvc4o



88




CHOOSING BEST BROWSER TO SUIT YOUR
REQUIREMENTS

8.1 FINDING THE BEST BROWSER ACCORDING TO THE

USERS REQUIREMENT18

Browsers are the key to the Internet these days, at least for most tasks. There are many, many

browsers for every platform and operating system, so the choice can be tough. However, this

should help narrow the search.





Step 1: Determine the age of your computer. How old is your computer? Is it a mobile

device? Know your systems specifications as this may be more suited to some browsers than

others.




18

 http://www.wikihow.com/Choose-an-Internet-Browser

89




Step 2: Think about your ideal browser; what would it be able to do? You may want it to be

quite simple, handling only the bare necessities. You may want some basic features like web

feed reading, bookmarking (favorites), or search boxes. Some browsers have a lot more, and

that's where it starts to get confusing.



Step 3: Make sure you know what platform you are on. Some browsers are only available to a

certain operating system, or not available to one operating system.



90




Step 4: Research browsers. Tabbed browsers include Safari (runs on OS X, iPhone and is

new to Windows), Firefox (general purpose with the most plug-ins), Opera(supports torrents,

handles e-mail and runs on mobile devices), Konqueror (dual purpose file manager),

Seamonkey (includes HTML editor and e-mail client), Off By One (tiny) and Flock (social

networking).



Step 5: See the features of all browsers you have found, and compare with what you want.



91




Step 6: Consider alternative lower-memory browsers, if you have low computer memory.

Consider Off by One, Dillo, SkipStone and NetSurf.



Step 7: Consider a text-based browser, if you want an even faster-than-fast(maximum

speed/hyperdrive) experience. Consider ELinks.





92




Step 8:  Find out if you can add features you may want or if there is an easy method to doing

so such as an existing plugin or extension in the case of Firefox.



Step 9: Download and install your new browser!

Activity

1. Compare the various browsers based on their characteristics‟.



RECOMMENDED VIDEOS:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sr7mgYD2tAc

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-jHs-RYD7gc

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gNiz4kfSZnw



93




GUIDELINES FOR SAFE INTERNET BROWSING

9.1 SAFE BROWSING

Internet security is a matter of great concern for internet users. It is important to know if a
19

website is secure or not while surfing the internet . A secure website creates a safe

connection between the website and the web browser so that entered data, such as personal

information, credit card details, banking information, etc, is not accessible to unauthorized

entities. When the browser opens a secured connection, "https" can be seen in the URL

instead of just http. To know if a website is secure or not, look for the locked yellow colour

padlock symbol on the lower right corner of the browser window.



9.1.1 How do I know if a website is secure?
Some web sites use a secure connection between the web site and your browser. This may be

important to you, for instance, if you want to pay online for a product or a service and have to

enter credit card information or other personal information.  To know if your browser is

viewing a secure web site, you can look in the lower right part of the window. There is a

small box in the frame of the window to the left of the area that describes which zone you are

in (usually the Internet zone, with a globe icon). If you see a yellow padlock icon, the web site

you are viewing is a "secure web site." If the box is empty, the web site does not have a

secure connection with your browser.








19

 http://ccm.net/faq/2-how-do-i-know-if-a-website-is-secure

94




9.2 TIPS FOR BUYING ONLINE20

Shopping online can be cheaper and more convenient for you and for businesses. However,

make sure you understand your rights and the risks before you shop online or bid in an online

auction.

I. Pay securely: Don‟t make any payment unless:

 You are on a secure website, and

 You can make a secure payment.

This will protect you against fraud and unauthorised credit card transactions. A secure

website address will always:

 begin with „https://‟, not „http://‟

 display the image of a closed padlock (usually in the bottom right corner of your

browser window).

Only make a payment if you can see both of these things. Never give out your bank

account details, credit card number or other personal details if you are not certain that

the business is a reputable trader.

II. Know the business: Only buy from websites you know and trust. Check that the

company has a physical street address and landline phone number. If the company

operates from overseas, you might have trouble getting a refund or repair.

III. Know the product: Make sure you check whether:

 the product is legal

 the product will work in Australia

 any warranties or guarantees offered are valid in Australia

 the product has an authorised repairer nearby.

IV. Check the contract: Make sure you read and understand:

 the terms and conditions of sale

 the refund policy

 the delivery details

 returns and repairs policies, including any associated costs.

V. Check the full cost: Be aware of the full cost of your purchase. Additional costs may

include:

 currency conversion

 taxes

20

 https://www.qld.gov.au/law/your-rights/consumer-rights-complaints-and-scams/consumer-advice-rights-and-
responsibilties/tips-to-become-a-smarter-shopper/tips-for-buying-online/

95




 postage and delivery fees

 packaging.

It might end up being cheaper to buy the product at a local shop.

VI. Protect your privacy: Only buy online if you are comfortable with a business‟s

privacy policy. Do not give out information unless they require it to complete the sale.

Remember, if a deal sounds too good to be true, it probably is.

VII. Keep records: Always write down any reference numbers and print out copies of:

 the order form (both before and after you confirm the order)

 receipts (can come by email or in a pop-up window).

  Always make sure all charges are correct by checking the receipt against your:

 credit card statement

 merchant account statement (such as PayPal)

 bank statement.

  The charges may be converted from another currency.

VIII. Online auction sites: Most online auction sites (like eBay) offer a dispute resolution

process for buyers and sellers. This should be your first step to resolve a dispute if:

 you did not receive the items you bought

 you did not receive payment for items you sold

 you received items that were significantly different from their description.

The eBay website has an example of this facility.

9.3 CLEARING CACHE FOR BROWSERS

Your internet browser's cache stores certain information (snapshots) of webpages you visit on

your computer or mobile device so that they'll load more quickly upon future visits and while

navigating through websites that use the same images on multiple pages so that you do not
21

download the same image multiple times . Occasionally, however your cache can prevent

you from seeing updated content, or cause functional problems when stored content conflicts

with live content. You can fix many browser problems simply by clearing your cache. This

article contains instructions with screenshots on how to clear the cache for all major browsers.

9.3.1 Clearing cache for Chrome Browsers above version 10


21

 http://www.wikihow.com/Clear-Your-Browser%27s-Cache

96






Step 1: Open the settings on Chrome. Click the menu icon in the upper right corner of the

browser to the right. Click settings on the bottom of the menu.



Step 2: From settings, click "Show advanced settings. It's located at the very bottom of the

settings section.

97






Step 3: Scroll to the privacy section and click "Clear browsing data.





98




Step 4: Select "Cached images and files". Uncheck all other options to avoid deleting browser

history, cookies and other things you may wish to retain. Change "Obliterate the following

items from" to "the beginning of time".



Step 5: Press "Clear browsing data". You are done!



9.3.2 Clearing cache for Chrome Browsers from version 1 to 9



Step 1: Once your browser is open, select the Tools menu (the wrench in the upper-right

corner) and select Options (Preferences on Mac).

99






Step 2: On the Under the Hood tab, click the Clear Browsing data button.



Step 3: Select the Empty the cache check-box.

100






Step 4: You can also choose the period of time you wish to delete cached information using

the Clear data from this period dropdown menu.



Step 5: Click the Clear Browsing Data button.



101




9.3.3 Clearing cache for Safari for iOS, iPhone and iPad



Step 1: Click on Settings from the home page.



Step 2: Scroll down until you see "Safari." Click on it to bring up the option page.

102






Step 3: Click "Clear Cookies and Data". A popup box will appear. Click "Clear Cookies

and Data" again to confirm your choice.



9.3.4 Clearing cache for Safari for Mac OS x



Step 1: Once your browser is open, click the Safari menu and select Empty Cache.

103






Step 2: Click Empty.



9.3.5 Clearing cache for Safari for windows



104




Step 1: Once your browser is open, click the gear icon on the top right.



Step 2: Select "Reset Safari..." This will prompt a screen to open.



Step 3: Select "Remove all website data" at the very bottom of the prompt. Check or

uncheck any other categories you want reset.

105






Step 4: Click “Reset”.



9.3.6 Clearing cache for Internet explorer 9, 10 and 11



Step 1: Once your browser is open, click the gear icon at the top right to open the

Settings menu. Then, select Safety and Delete Browsing History.

106






Step 2: Select Temporary Internet Files. You will also need to uncheck all of the other boxes,

especially Preserve Favorites website data. This option makes the window also delete objects

from websites in your Favorites folder, which is necessary to completely clear your cache.



Step 3: Click the Delete button near the bottom of the window to perform the operations (i.e.

clear your cache by deleting temporary files).

107






Step 4:  Your computer will work for a moment, and then the process will be complete.

You've successfully cleared Internet Explorer 9's Cache!

9.3.7 Clearing cache for Internet explorer 8



Step 1: Once your browser is open, click the Tools menu.

108






Step 2: Click on Delete Browsing History.



Step 3: Select Temporary Internet Files.

109






Step 4: Click the Delete button near the bottom of the window to delete your temporary files

(i.e. clear your cache).



Step 5: Set your cache to delete every time you close Internet Explorer. If you want the

browser to automatically clear the cache whenever you close it, close the 'Delete Browsing

History' window, select 'Internet Options' from the Tools menu, and check the 'Delete

Browsing history on exit' checkbox.

110




Note: IE8 has a "feature" which retains some cookies even after you clear your cache if you

do not UNCHECK the "Preserve Favorites Website Data." If you truly need to clear your

cache, you will want to uncheck this!

9.3.8 Clearing cache for Firefox



Step 1: On a PC, click the "Firefox" menu in the top left corner. Next, select the right arrow

next to "History >", and click "Clear Recent History".



Step 2: Make sure "Details" is expanded, then select "Cache" from the list. Uncheck

everything else.

111






Step 3: In the "Time Range to Clear" drop down, select "Everything".



Step 4: Select "Clear Now". Your computer will work for a moment, and the process will be

complete. You've successfully cleared Firefox's Cache!

9.3.9 Clearing cache for Firefox 33

112






Step 1: Click the Menu button ("hamburger button" - the one with three horizontal lines) and

then choose Options.



Step 2: Firefox for Mac: On a Mac, choose Preferences from the Firefox menu and then

continue as instructed below. With the Options window now open, click the Privacy tab. In

the History area, click the clear your recent history link.



113




Step 3: If you wish to clear other kinds of stored data, feel free to check the appropriate

boxes. They will be cleared with the cache in the next step.

9.3.10 Clearing cache for opera



Step 1: Once your browser is open, select the "Settings" menu and click "Delete private

data".



Step 2: Make sure the "Delete entire cache" box is checked. Make sure any unwanted

categories are left unchecked.

114






Step 3: Press “Delete”.

9.3.11 Clearing cache for Ccleaner



Ccleaner- This is a computer maintenance tool that lets you scan and delete browser cache

and cookies. Launch it, go to Cleaner tab and make sure to check the Temporary internet files

for the browser you have.

115






Activity

a. Perform the cache clearing opetation on your system browser.

b. Perform the cache clearing operation on the browser of your smartphone.

c. Install Ccleaner in your system and use it to perform cache clearing operation.

d. Find out whether the popular websites you visit daily are secure or not.

e. Can you find any banking site that does not use https://

f. Can you find some social networking site that does not use https://

g. Can you list down some important points that should be kept in mind before going for

     online shopping.



116




WIRELESS SECURITY

This chapter is about different kind of Best Practices that should be followed when using

Wireless LAN.

10.1 WHAT IS WIRELESS LAN?

The Wireless LAN or WLAN is becoming a popular way to connect devices such as

computers these days. In offices and homes, WLAN has become an alternative way of

communication compared to wired LAN.  The convenience to connect different devices is

both cost effective and easily maintainable. The Wikipedia says: “Wireless LANs have

become popular in the home due to ease of installation, and the increasing to offer wireless

access to their customers; often for free.”

The other factors why WLANs are becoming more acceptable are:

1. No need to be connected physically with each other through any medium such as cables.

You can roam around freely in office premises, home or around.

2. WLANs are cost effective. Cabling all the way in the offices, hotels etc are not needed.

So it‟s cheap and provides same quality of service.

3. Unreachable spots where a cable is hardly accessible, WLAN signals can reach out such

as big installations like airports. Also surfing outdoors is also convenient. Just install the

device called Access Points (AP) and you are done.

4. Less interruption and easy trouble shooting in case of failures as compared to cabled

networks.

5. More secure as most of APs support best encryption methods which protect them from

sniffing and other attacks.



Figure 44: A typical Wireless network

117




10.2 MAJOR ISSUES WITH WLAN

Having said that, WLAN are also as prone to various attacks as their counterpart wired LNAs

are. Actually WLANs are easier to hack as compared to wired LANs, if not properly

configured, due to its easy accessibility around the installation. No need to be in contact of

physical wires to hack can be done from anywhere. Its convenience can turn into serious risk

to the organization if not configured properly. Major attacks include such as, Sniffing, Key

cracking, DoS (Denial of Service), Deauthentication attacks, War driving etc. This chapter is

not focused on attacks, we shall mainly concentrate on best practices- how to install and use

WLAN securely which can thwart a number of above mentioned attacks.

10.2.1 Secure WLAN
Wireless Security mainly depends on these 3 factors:

 How much is your wireless network secured in terms of encryption being used.

 Monitoring for suspicious and unusual activities.

 User awareness and education.

These are the combination of various approaches ranging from corporate to home networks.

These are also for users how to remain safe while surfing.

10.2.2 Wi-Fi at home
Using a Wi-Fi at home is not a luxury anymore it has become a necessity. However, when the

question of security comes into the scene, the first thought that would arise in my mind is how

you can protect something which you cannot see, neither can you feel it? Protecting a home

wireless network is altogether a different side of the coin as compared to wired networks.

Most of wireless network device vendor‟s and Internet Service provider do not provide any

security settings by default and leave the customer to fend for herself. So make sure, your

network is secured from being maliciously used.

There is no silver bullet that will protect your wireless network infrastructure. These are,

however, some countermeasures listed below that should be used in conjunction with each

other to secure your wireless network to the highest level:

1. Use most secure possible encryption: The first and most necessary step- use industry

standard encryptions. The old (however generally used) WEP-Wired Equivalent Privacy, has

been known to be broken. Even you use complex passwords it can be broken and decrypted

within minutes or hours. WEP uses 40 bit or 128 bits RC4 ciphers to encrypt the channel.

118




Instead use secure protocols such as WPA 2 – Wi-Fi Protected Access- 2, which uses strong

128 bits AES ciphers and is typically considered more robust encryption strategy available.

Attacks mitigated: WEP Key cracking, Sniffing, Capturing/Eavesdropping

2. Use Firewall: All the wireless routers come with built-in firewalls. Enable them with all

the security features. You should block any anonymous ping requests and place restrictions on

website browsing, if required. Define additional security policies and apply them.

Attacks mitigated: Fingerprinting, System compromise

 3. Have a monitoring system in place: There‟s a saying- prevention is better than a cure. If

you are able to detect some suspicious activities before it penetrates your network, you can

block them or take precautionary measures. Deploy WIPS/WIDS for monitoring suspicious

activities.

Attacks mitigated: Scanning, DoS

 4. Don’t use default credentials: Every wireless router comes with a set of default

username/password. Sometimes, people don‟t change them and keep using them for long

time. Username and passwords are used by computers or other devices to connect to wireless

router. If any hacker is able to guess them, he can connect to your network easily. Studies

show that majority of users use the same combination of username/passwords as set by

manufacturers. Some default username combinations are: admin/admin, admin/password or

admin/ “ “.

Attacks mitigated: Unauthorized access, War driving

 5. Disable Auto-connect feature: Some devices or the computers/laptops have „Let this tool

manage your wireless networks‟ or „Connect automatically to available network‟.  Such users

having this auto-connect feature enabled are prone to Phishing attack or Rogue AP attack.

Attackers keep their APs alive and kicking for such kind of unsuspecting users. They also use

luring names as „HotSpot‟, „SecureConnect‟, ‟GovtNetworks‟ etc. The user will never suspect

them and keep surfing the wireless network happily. Also if you have not changed the default

password of your router, the attacker will try to use this feature on their machine and

automatically connect using the easily guessable default passwords.

Attacks mitigated: Phishing, Sniffing, Rouge AP association

 6. Don’t use public Wi-Fi spots to surf sensitive websites:  Free and open wireless

networks available on airports, cafes, railway stations are not very secure by nature. They do

119




not use any encryption to secure the channel between your laptop to the router. So any

information which is not by default going on HTTPS from your laptop/smart phone is

susceptible to sniffing and even more your session could be hijacked because the unencrypted

channel may leak the active session ID used by your website. Recently to demonstrate these

types of attacks one researcher developed a tool Firesheep

[http://codebutler.github.com/firesheep/]. All the attacker needs to do is to just install this tool

in Firefox and start sniffing the communications on a public unencrypted Wi-Fi. Some

applications like Facebook encrypts the login page [HTTPS] but internal pages are served on

unencrypted [HTTP] channel so your session ID can be leaked.

Attacks mitigated: Sniffing, Session Hijacking

7. Change the default SSID: Although this will not prevent hackers breaking into a network,

using a default SSID acts as an indication that the user is careless. So he may be an obvious

target to explore further to see if he still uses the default passwords as well?

Attacks mitigated: War driving

8. Restrict access by assigning static IP addresses and MAC filtering: Disable automatic

IP assigning feature and use private static IPs to the legitimate devices you want to connect.

This will help you in blocking unwanted devices from being connected to your network. Also,

enable MAC filtering- router remembers MAC of each and every device connected to it and

saves it as list. You can use this facility to restrict access. Only a set of trusted devices can be

allowed to connect. However MAC spoofing is still possible but it raises an extra bar for your

wireless network.

9. Turn off your router when not in use: Last but not least, a little obvious, but it will save

your network from all the attacks for that time period.

1.7.2.3 Wi-Fi in a Corporate/Enterprise Network

Due to the nature of activity and criticality of information, it is very important that Corporate /

Enterprise networks have a higher degree of security.

The following are good to have:

 Defining an adequate organization wide Information Security policy & procedures for

wireless network

120




 SSID‟s should not be associated with the organization, AP vendor or any other related

information which would be easy to guess or associate with the current organization

 Enable WPA2 Enterprise encryption with RADIUS authentication and use of EAP

protocol like EAP-TTLS, TLS   etc.

 Implementation of PKI infrastructure. CA signed certificates to authenticate the server

to client and vice versa

 Filtering of clients based on unique identifier like MAC Address

 Isolated „Guest‟ wireless network with no interface / connection to the corporate

network

 Limiting the radius of Wi-Fi network by reducing the power output of the AP

 Allocating IP Address to the employee and guest machines only after successful

authentication

 Periodically changing the keys & passwords

 Use of VPN while accessing corporate information from Public Wi-Fi network

 Client side utilities like DecaffeintIDcan help in detecting changes in ARP table and

serve as common man‟s IDS to protect against attacks like „hole196‟ and DoS.

 Implementation of Wireless IDS. Wireless IDS is a new concept. The key features of

Wireless IDS are:

 Prevention against Rogue AP‟s

 Detection & prevention against DoS attacks

 Assistance in locating the approximate physical location of the attacker

 Assistance in enforcing the Organization‟s Information Security policy on

wireless networks

 Detection of use of scanning tools like Kismet & NetStumbler

ACTVITY

1. What are the precations one should take using a wi-fi network at public place?

2. How to secure home network?

3. How to secure enterprise network?

4. Find more about the terms over inernet:

 IDS

 DOS

 Kismet

 NetStumbler

121






RECOMENDED VIDEOS

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_WHynHcXm7c

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jmszt__J204

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aktovPyT0iM

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CStMHLQWa_8

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a9q-tDRCTtc

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xex1h93fnI8

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a9q-tDRCTtc



122




EMAIL AND SOCIAL MEDIA SECURITY

11.1 SAFE BROWSING GUIDELINES FOR SOCIAL

NETWORKING SITES22

Online communities have existed since the invention of the internet. First there were bulletin

boards and email lists, which gave people around the world opportunities to connect, to

communicate and to share information about particular subjects. Today, social networking

websites have greatly expanded the range of possible interactions, allowing you to share

messages, pictures, files and even up-to-the-minute information about what you are doing and

where you are. These functions are not new or unique – any of these actions can also be

performed via the internet without joining a social networking site.

Although these networks can be very useful, and promote social interaction both online and

offline, when using them you may be making information available to people who want to

abuse it. Think of a social networking site as being like a huge party. There are people there

that you know, as well as some that you don't know at all. Imagine walking through the party

with all your personal details, and up-to-the-minute accounts of what you are thinking, written

on a big sign stuck on your back so that everyone can read it without you even knowing. Do

you really want everyone to know all about you?

Remember that social networking sites are owned by private businesses, and that they make

their money by collecting data about individuals and selling that data on, particularly to third

party advertisers. When you enter a social networking site, you are leaving the freedoms of

the internet behind and are entering a network that is governed and ruled by the owners of the

site. Privacy settings are only meant to protect you from other members of the social network,

but they do not shield your data from the owners of the service. Essentially you are giving all

your data over to the owners and trusting them with it.

If you work with sensitive information and topics, and are interested in using social

networking services, it is important to be very aware of the privacy and security issues that

they raise. Human rights advocates are particularly vulnerable to the dangers of social

networking sites and need to be extremely careful about the information they reveal about

themselves AND about the people they work with.


22

 https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/social-networking



123




Before you use any social networking site it is important to understand how they make you

vulnerable, and then take steps to protect yourself and the people you work with. This guide

will help you understand the security implications of using social networking sites.

11.1.1General Tips on using Social Networking platforms safely
Social media have become an evident part of our life. We share out updates with our friends,

family and anyone who is concerned using social media. But the hackers can use this

information to steal sensitive data and hack your account. Given below are some of the

general tips on using social media.

 Always ask the questions:

 Who can access the information I am putting online?

 Who controls and owns the information I put into a social networking site?

 What information about me are my contacts passing on to other people?

 Will my contacts mind if I share information about them with other people?

 Do I trust everyone with whom I'm connected?

 Always make sure you use secure passwords to access social networks. If anyone

else does get into your account, they are gaining access to a lot of information about

you and about anyone else you are connected to via that social network. Change your

passwords regularly as a matter of routine.

 Make sure you understand the default privacy settings offered by the social

networking site, and how to change them.

 Consider using separate accounts/identities, or maybe different pseudonyms, for

different campaigns and activities. Remember that the key to using a network safely is

being able to trust its members. Separate accounts may be a good way to ensure that

such trust is possible.

 Be careful when accessing your social network account in public internet

spaces. Delete your password and browsing history when using a browser on a

public machine.

 Access social networking sites using https:// to safeguard your username, password

and other information you post. Using https:// rather than http:// adds another layer of

security by encrypting the traffic from your browser to your social networking site.

 Be careful about putting too much information into your status updates – even if you

trust the people in your networks. It is easy for someone to copy your information.

124




 Most social networks allow you to integrate information with other social networks.

For example you can post an update on your Twitter account and have it automatically

posted on your Facebook account as well. Be particularly careful when integrating

your social network accounts! You may be anonymous on one site, but exposed

when using another.

 Be cautious about how safe your content is on a social networking site. Never rely on

a social networking site as a primary host for your content or information. It is

very easy for governments to block access to a social networking site within their

boundaries if they suddenly find its content objectionable. The administrators of a

social networking site may also decide to remove objectionable content themselves,

rather than face censorship within a particular country.

11.1.2 Posting Personal Details
Social networking sites ask you for a good deal of data about yourself to make it easier for

other users to find and connect to you. Perhaps the biggest vulnerability this creates for users

of these sites is the possibility of identity fraud, which is increasingly common. In addition,

the more information about yourself you reveal online, the easier it becomes for the

authorities to identify you and monitor your activities. The online activities of diaspora

activists from some countries have led to the targeting of their family members by the

authorities in their homelands.

Ask yourself: is it necessary to post the following information online?

 birth dates

 contact phone numbers

 addresses

 details of family members

 sexual orientation

 education and employment history

11.1.3 Friends, Followers and Contacts
The first thing you will do after filling in your personal details with any social networking

application is establish connections to other people. Presumably these contacts are people you

know and trust – but you may also be connecting to an online community of like-minded

individuals that you have never met. The most important thing to understand is what

information you are allowing this online community to have.

125




When using a social network account such as Facebook, where a lot of information about

yourself is held, consider only connecting to people you know and trust not to misuse the

information you post.

11.1.4 Status Updates
On Twitter and Facebook and similar networks, the status update answers the questions: What

am I doing right now? What's happening? The most important thing to understand about the

status update is who can actually see it. The default setting for the status update on most

social networking applications is that anyone on the internet can see it. If you only want your

contacts to see the updates, you need to tell the social networking application to keep your

updates hidden from everyone else.

To do this in Twitter, look for “Protect Your Tweets”. In Facebook, change your settings to

share your updates with “Friends Only”. Even if you switch to those settings, consider how

easy it is for your information to be reposted by followers and friends. Agree with your

network of friends on a common approach to passing on the information posted in your social

networking accounts. You should also think about what you may be revealing about your

friends that they may not want other people to know; it's important to be sensitive about this,

and to ask others to be sensitive about what they reveal about you.

There have been many incidents in which information included in status updates has been

used against people. Teachers in the US have been fired after posting updates about how they

felt about their students; other employees have lost their jobs for posting about their

employers. This is something that nearly everyone needs to be careful about.

11.1.5 Sharing Online Content
It's easy to share a link to a website and get your friend's attention. But who else will be

paying attention, and what kind of reaction will they have? If you share (or "like") a site that

opposes some position taken by your government, for example, agents of that government

very might well take an interest and target you for additional surveillance or direct

persecution.

If you want your contacts (and of course the administrators of the social networking platform

you use) to be the only ones who can see the things you share or mark as interesting, be sure

to check your privacy settings.

11.1.6 Revealing your Location

126




Most social networking sites will display your location if that data is available. This function

is generally provided when you use a GPS-enabled phone to interact with a social network,

but don't assume that it's not possible if you aren't connecting from a mobile. The network

your computer is connected to may also provide location data. The way to be safest about it is

to double-check your settings.

Be particularly mindful of location settings on photo and video sharing sites. Don't just

assume that they're not sharing your location: double-check your settings to be sure.

11.1.7 Sharing Videos and Photos
Photos and videos can reveal people's identities very easily. It's important that you have the

consent of the subject/s of any photo or video that you post. If you are posting an image of

someone else, be aware of how you may be compromising their privacy. Never post a video

or photo of anyone without getting their consent first.

Photos and videos can also reveal a lot of information unintentionally. Many cameras will

embed hidden data (metadata tags), that reveal the date, time and location of the photo,

camera type, etc. Photo and video sharing sites may publish this information when you upload

content to their sites.

11.1.8 Instant Chats
Many social networking sites have tools that allow you to have discussions with your friends

in real time. These operate like Instant Messaging and are one of the most insecure ways to

communicate on the internet, both because they may reveal who you are communicating with,

and what you are communicating about.

Connecting to the site via https is a minimum requirement for secure chatting, but even this is

not always a guarantee that your chat is using a secure connection. For example, Facebook

chat uses a different channel to HTTPS (and is more prone to exposure).

It is more secure to use a specific application for your chats, such as Pidgin with an Off-the-

record plugin, which uses encryption. Read the 'Pidgin – secure instant messaging' hands-on

guide.

11.1.9 Joining and Creating Groups, Events and Communities
What information are you giving to people if you join a group or community? What does it

say about you? Alternatively, what are people announcing to the world if they join a group or

community that you have created? How are you putting people at risk?

127




When you join a community or group online it is revealing something about you to others. On

the whole, people may assume that you support or agree with what the group is saying or

doing, which could make you vulnerable if you are seen to align yourself with particular

political groups, for example. Also if you join a group with a large number of members that

you don't know, then this can compromise any privacy or security settings that you have

applied to your account, so think about what information you are giving away before joining.

Are you using your photo and real name so strangers can identify you?

Alternatively, if you set up a group and people choose to join it, what are they announcing to

the world by doing so? For example, perhaps it is a gay and lesbian support group that you

have set up to help people, but by joining it people are openly identifying themselves as gay

or gay-friendly, which could bring about dangers for them in the real world.

11.2 EMAIL SECURITY TIPS23

1. Don't open email attachments that you are not expecting, or which have come from

someone you do not know. When you open such an email, make sure that your anti-virus

software is up-to-date and pay close attention to any warnings from your browser or email

program.

2. You can use anonymity software which can help you hide your chosen email service from

anyone who might be monitoring your internet connection. A good, free software

programme to do this is Tor (Find out more about Tor browser using Google). If you don't

want to give away information about your identity through your email, do not register a

username or 'Full Name' that is related to your personal or professional life.

3. You can avoid getting spam (unwanted or junk email) by guarding your email address and

distributing it sparingly. Also, never open or reply to any emails you consider to be spam,

because spammers will take this as a proof of the legitimacy of the address and will just

send you more spam. Consider using a spam filter, but remember that it needs to be

monitored as it may mistake a genuine email for spam.

4. You should try to avoid your emails being mistaken for spam by the recipients. Spam

filters will block messages with certain words in the subject heading. It is worth scanning

your spam folder for subject lines that are getting blocked.


23

 https://survival.tacticaltech.org/internet/email/tips

128




5. Beware of email scams. Many scam emails pretend to come from a bank, Ebay, Paypal, or

other online shops. If you get an email telling you that your account is in danger of being

shut down, or that you need to take immediate action by updating your account

information, be very suspicious: these messages are usually scams. Another frequent scam

has you receiving an email from someone you know which says that they have had an

emergency and asks you to send them money. This person's email account is likely to

have been compromised by a scammer.

6. Pay close attention if your browser suddenly gives you messages about invalid security

certificates when you attempt to access a secure webmail account. It could mean that

someone is tampering with the communication between your computer and the server in

order to intercept your messages.



ACTIVITY

1. What are anonymous accounts? Find some browsers which supports anonymouity.

2. After going though the above section, find out whether you were following the above safe

     pracitices while handling your social medial account? Find the gaps?

3. Based on the above recommendations, adjust your social media account settings.

RECOMENDED VIDEOS

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EFHfg1bfgVc

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tkgLHoaFeFk

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QUyla_nMJis

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-CeuqCHX7tE

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xCHTmzfsGmI



129




SMARTPHONE SECURITY

24
12.1 INTRODUCTION

Advances in technology now mean that mobile phones can provide services and features

similar to desktop or laptop computers. These Smartphones offer many new ways to

communicate and capture and disseminate media. To provide these new functionalities, the

smartphones not only use the mobile network, but also connect to the internet either via a wi-

fi connection (similar to a laptop at an internet cafe) or via data connections through the

mobile network operator.

So while you can, of course, make phone calls with a smartphone, it is better to view

smartphones as small computing devices. This means that the other material in this toolkit is

relevant to your use of your smartphone as well as your computer.

Smartphones usually support a wide range of functionality – web browsing, email, voice and

instant messaging over the internet, capturing, storing and transmitting audio, videos and

photos, enabling social networking, multi-user games, banking and many other activities.

However, many of these tools and features introduce new security issues, or increase existing

risks. For instance, some smartphones have built-in geo-location (GPS) functionality, which

means they can provide your precise location to your mobile network operator by default, and

to many applications you use on your phone (such as social networking, mapping, browsing

and other applications). As mentioned before, mobile phones already relay your location

information to your mobile network operator (as part of the normal functions of the phone).

However, the additional GPS functionality not only increases the precision of your location

information, it also increases the amount of places where this information might be

distributed.

It's worth reviewing all the risks associated with mobile phones discussed in our guide How to

use mobile phones as securely as possible as all of them are also relevant to smartphone use.

That guide also covers issues of eavesdropping, interception of SMS or phone calls, SIM card

related issues, and best practices.

In this guide we'll take a look at the additional security challenges posed by smartphones.


24

 https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/smartphones

130




12.2 SMARTPHONE SECURITY GUIDELINES

12.2.1 Purses, Wallets, Smartphones
We have an intuitive understanding of the value of keeping our purse or wallet safe, because

so much sensitive information is stored in them, and losing them will compromise our privacy

and safety. People are less aware of the amount of personal information being carried in their

smartphones, and consider losing a phone a nuisance rather than a risk. If you also think that a

smartphone is a computing device which is always connected to a network and is continually

carried around, it also highlights the important difference between a holder of discrete,

passive information (like a wallet), and an active and interactive item like a smartphone.

A simple exercise can help illustrate this:

Empty the content of your wallet or purse, and take account of sensitive items. Typically you

may find: - Pictures of loved ones (~5 pictures) - Identification cards (driver's license,

membership cards, social security cards) - Insurance and health information (~2 cards) -

Money (~5 bills) - Credit/Debit cards (~3 cards)

Now, examine the contents of your smartphone. A typical smartphone user may find some of

the above in higher quantities, and in some cases much more valuable items:

 Pictures of loved ones (~100 pictures)

 Email applications and their passwords

 Emails (~500 emails)

 Videos (~50 videos)

 Social networking applications and their passwords

 Banking applications (with access to the bank accounts)

 Sensitive documents

 Sensitive communication records

 A live connection to your sensitive information

The more you use smartphones, the more you need to become aware of the associated risks

and take appropriate precautions. Smartphones are powerful amplifiers and distributors of

your personal data. They are designed to provide as much connectivity as possible and to link

to social networking services by default. This is because your personal data is valuable

information that can be aggregated, searched and sold.

131




It can be disastrous if you lose your phone without having a backup of your most important

data (such as your contacts) in a secure location. Besides backing up your data, make sure you

also know how to restore the data. Keep a hard copy of the steps you need to take so you can

do it quickly in an emergency.

In this chapter we'll start by introducing some smartphone basics – a description of various

platforms and some basic setup procedures for securing your information and communication.

The remaining parts of this chapter will cover specific precautions related to common uses of

smartphones.

12.2.2 Platforms, Setup and Installation

12.2.2.1 Platforms and Operating Systems
At the time of writing, the most common smartphones in use are Apple's iPhone and Google's

Android, followed by Blackberry and Windows phones. The key difference between Android

and other operating systems is that Android is, mostly, an Open Source (FOSS) system, which

allows the operating system to be audited independently to verify if it properly protects users'

information and communication. It also facilitates development of security applications for

this platform. Many security-aware programmers develop Android applications with user

safety and security in mind. Some of these will be highlighted later in this chapter.

Regardless what type of smartphone you are using, there are issues that you should be aware

of when you use a phone which connects to the internet and comes with features such

as GPS or wireless networking capacities. In this chapter we focus on devices with the

Android platform, because, as mentioned above, it's easier to secure data and

communications. Nonetheless, basic setup guides and some applications for devices other

than Android phones are provided, too. Blackberry phones have been presented as “secure”

messaging and email devices. This is because messages and emails are securely channeled

through Blackberry servers, out of the reach of potential eavesdroppers. Unfortunately, more

and more governments are demanding access to these communications, citing need for

guarding against potential terrorism and organised crime. India, United Arab Emirates, Saudi

Arabia, Indonesia and Lebanon are examples of governments which have scrutinized the use

of Blackberry devices and demanded access to user data in their countries.

12.2.2.2 Feature Phones
Another category of mobiles are often called 'feature phones'. Recently, feature phones have

increased their functionalities to include those of some smartphones. But generally, feature

phones' operating systems are less accessible, therefore there are limited opportunities for

132




security applications or improvements. We do not specifically address feature phones,

although many measures discussed here make sense for feature phones too.

12.2.2.3 Branded and locked smartphones
Smartphones are usually sold branded or locked. Locking smartphones means that the device

can only be operated with one carrier, whose SIM card is the only one that will work in the

device. Mobile network operators usually brand a phone by installing their own firmware or

software. They may also disable some functionalities or add others. Branding is a means for

companies to increase revenue by channelling your smartphone use, often also collecting data

about how you are using the phone or by enabling remote access to your smartphone.

For these reasons, we recommend that you buy an unbranded smartphone if you can. A

locked phone poses a higher risk since all your data is routed through one carrier, which

centralises your data streams and makes it impossible to change SIM cards to disseminate the

data over different carriers. If your phone is locked, ask someone you trust about unlocking it.

12.2.2.4 General Setup
Smartphones have many settings which control the security of the device. It is important to

pay attention to how your smartphone is set up. In the Hands-on Guides below we will alert

you to certain smartphone security settings that are available but not active by default, as well

as those which are active by default and make your phone vulnerable.

12.2.2.5 Installing and updating applications
The usual way to install new software on your smartphone is to use the iPhone Appstore or

Google Play store, log in with your user credentials, and download and install a desired

application. By logging-in you associate your usage of the online store with the logged-in user

account. The owners of the application store keep records of this user's browsing history and

application choices.

The applications which are offered in the official online store are, supposedly, verified by

store owners (Google or Apple), but in reality this provides weak protection against what

applications will do after being installed on your phone. For example, some applications may

copy and send out your address book after you install them on your phone. On Android

phones each application needs to request, during the installation process, what it will be

permitted to do when it is in use. You should pay close attention to what permissions are

requested, and if these permissions make sense for the function of the app you are installing.

For example, if you are considering a "news reader" application and you find out that it

requests the rights to send your contacts over a mobile data connection to a third party, you

133




should look for alternative applications with appropriate access and rights. )ites. Some users

may want to consider these alternative sites to minimize online contact with Google. One of

the alternative store is F-Droid ('Free Droid'), which only provides FOSS applications.

However please remember that you should trust the site before you download any apps from

it. For inexperienced users we recommend that you use Google Play store.

If you don't want to (or are unable to) go online to access apps, you can transfer apps from

someone else's phone by sending .apk files (short for 'android application package') via

bluetooth. Alternetively you could download the .apk file to your device's Micro SD card or

use a usb cable to move it there from a PC. When you have received the file, simply long tap

on the filename and you will be prompted to install it. (Note: be especially careful while using

Bluetooth.



12.2.3 Communicating Securely(Through Voice and Messages) with a
Smartphone

12.2.3.1 Secure Voice Communication
Basic telephony

In order to send or receive any calls or communications to your phone, the signal towers
25

nearest you are alerted by your phone of its presence . As a result of those alerts and

communications the network service provider knows the precise geographic location of your

mobile phone at any given time.

About Anonymity: If you are conducting sensitive phone conversations or sending sensitive

SMS messages, beware of the above tracking 'feature' of all mobile phones. Consider

adopting the steps below:

 Make calls from different locations each time, and choose locations that are not

associated with you.

 Keep your phone turned off, with the battery disconnected, go to the chosen location,

switch your phone on, communicate, switch the phone off and disconnect the battery.

Doing this habitually, each time you have to make a call, will mean that the network

cannot track your movements.

 Change phones and SIM cards often. Rotate them between friends or the second-hand

market.


25

 https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/mobile-phones

134




 Use unregistered pre-paid SIM cards if this is possible in your area. Avoid paying for

a phone or SIM cards using a credit card, which will also create a connection between

these items and you.

About eavesdropping: Your phone can be set to record and transmit any sounds within the

range of its microphone without your knowledge. Some phones can be switched on remotely

and brought into action in this way, even when they look as though they are switched off.

 Never let people whom you don't trust get physical access to your phone; this is a

common way of installing spying software on your phone.

 If you are conducting private and important meetings, switch your phone off and

disconnect the battery. Or don't carry the phone with you if you can leave it where it

will be absolutely safe.

 Make sure that any person with whom you communicate also employs the safeguards

described here.

 In addition, don't forget that using a phone in public, or in places that you don't trust,

makes you vulnerable to traditional eavesdropping techniques, or to having your

phone stolen.

About interception of calls: Typically, encryption of voice communications (and of text

messages) that travel through the mobile phone network is relatively weak. There are

inexpensive techniques which third parties can use to intercept your written communications,

or to listen to your calls, if they are in proximity to the phone and can receive transmissions

from it. And of course, mobile phone providers have access to all your voice and text

communications. It is currently expensive and/or somewhat technically cumbersome to

encrypt phone calls so that even the mobile phone provider can't eavesdrop – however, these

tools are expected to become cheaper soon. To deploy the encryption you would first have to

install an encryption application on your phone, as well as on the device of the person with

whom you plan to communicate. Then you would use this application to send and receive

encrypted calls and/or messages. Encryption software is currently only supported on a few

models of so-called 'smart' phones.

135




Conversations between Skype and mobile phones are not encrypted either, since at some
26

point, the signal will move to the mobile network, where encryption is NOT in place . Using

Internet through your Smartphone over mobile data connections or WiFi can provide more

secure ways to communicate with people, namely by using VoIP and employing means to

secure this channel of communication. Some smartphone tools can even extend some of this

security beyond VoIP, to mobile phone calls as well (See Redphone below).

Here we list a few tools and their pros and cons:

Skype

The most popular commercial VoIP application, Skype, is available for all smartphone

platforms and works well if your wireless connectivity is reliable. It is less reliable on mobile

data connections.

Skype is a non Open-Source software what makes it very difficult to independently confirm

its level of security. Additionally, Skype is owned by Microsoft, which has a commercial

interest in knowing when you use Skype and from where. Skype also may allow law

enforcement agencies retrospective access to all your communications history.

Other VoIP tools

Using VoIP is generally free (or significantly cheaper than mobile phone calls) and leaves few

data traces. In fact, a secured VoIP call can be the most secure way to communicate.

RedPhone is a Free and Open-Source Software application that encrypts voice

communication data sent between two devices that run this application. It is easy to install and

very easy to use, since it integrates itself into your normal dialing and contact scheme. But

people you want to talk to also need to install and use RedPhone. For ease of use, RedPhone

uses your mobile number as a way to identify you to your contacts. Unfortunately, this makes

it more difficult to use RedPhone without a functioning mobile service plan, even on devices

capable of using WiFi to connect to the Internet. RedPhone also uses a central server, which

puts the administrators of the service in a powerful position by allowing them to see much of

the meta-data related to your encrypted VoIP calls.

CSipSimple is a powerful VoIP client for Android phones that is well maintained and comes

with many easy set-up wizards for different VoIP services.


26

 https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/smartphones

136




Open Secure Telephony Network (OSTN) and the server provided by the Guardian

project, ostel.co, currently offers one of the most secure means to communicate via voice.

Knowing and trusting the entity that operates the server for your VoIP communication needs

is an important consideration.

When using CSipSimple, you never directly communicate with your contact, instead all your

data is routed through the Ostel server. This makes it much harder to trace your data and find

out who you are talking to. Additionally, Ostel doesn't retain any of this data, except the

account data that you need to log in. All your speech is securely encrypted and even your

meta data, which is usually very hard to disguise, is blurred since traffic is proxied through

the ostel.co server. If you download CSipSimple from ostel.co it also comes preconfigured for

use with ostel, which makes it very easy to install and use.

Tool Guides for CSipSimple and Ostel.co are forthcoming. In the meantime, more

information can be found by following the links above.

12.2.3.2 Sending Messages Securely
You should use precautions when sending SMS and using instant messaging or chatting on

your smartphone.

SMS

SMS communication is insecure by default. Anyone with access to a mobile

telecommunication network can intercept these messages easily and this is an everyday

occurrence in many situations. Don't rely on sending unsecured SMS messages in critical

situations. There is also no way of authenticating SMS messages, so it is impossible to know

if the contents of a message was changed during delivery or if the sender of the message

really is the person they claim to be.

Securing SMS

TextSecure is a FOSS tool for sending and receiving secure SMS on Android phones. It

works both for encrypted and non-encrypted messages, so you can use it as your default SMS

application. To exchange encrypted messages this tool has to be installed by both the sender

and the recipient of a message, so you will need to get people you communicate with

regularly to use it as well. TextSecure automatically detects when an encrypted message is

received from another TextSecure user. It also allows you to send encrypted messages to

more than one person. Messages are automatically signed making it nearly impossible to

tamper with the contents of a message. In our TextSecure hands-on guide we explain in detail

the features of this tool and how to use it.

137




Secure Chat

Instant messaging and chatting on your phone can produce a lot of information that is at risk

of interception. These conversations might be used against you by adversaries at a later date.

You should therefore be extremely wary about what you reveal when you are writing on your

phone while instant messaging and chatting.

There are ways to chat and instant message securely. The best way is to use end-to-end

encryption, as this will enable you to make sure the person on the other end is who you want.

We recommend ChatSecure as a secure text chat application for the Android phones.

ChatSecure offers easy and strong encryption for your chats with Off-the-Record Messaging

protocol. This encryption provides both authenticity (you can verify that you are chatting with

the right person) and the independent security of each session so that even if the encryption of

one chat session is compromised, other past and future sessions will remain secure.

ChatSecure has been designed to work together with Orbot, so your chat messages can be

routed through the Tor anonymizing network. This makes it very hard to trace it or even find

out that it happened.

For iPhones, the ChatSecure client provides the same features, although it is not easy to use

it with the Tor network.

Whichever application you will use always consider which account you use to chat from. For

example when you use Google Talk, your credentials and time of your chatting session are

known to Google. Also agree with your conversation partners on not saving chat histories,

especially if they aren't encrypted.

12.2.3.3 Storing Information on your Smartphone
Smartphones come with large data storage capacities. Unfortunately, the data stored on your

device can be easily accessible by third parties, either remotely or with physical access to the

phone. You can take steps to encrypt any sensitive information on your phone by using

specific tools.

Date Encryption Tools

The Android Privacy Guard (APG) allows OpenGPG encryption for files and emails. It can

be used to keep your files and documents safe on your phone, as well when emailing.

Recording Password Securely

You can keep all your needed passwords in one secure, encrypted file by using Keepass. You

will only need to remember one master password to access all the others. With Keepass you

138




can use very strong passwords for each account you have, as Keepass will remember them for

you, and it also comes with a password generator to create new passwords. You can

synchronise Keepass password databases between your phone and your computer. We

recommned that you synchronise only those passwords that you will actually use on your

mobile phone. You can create a separate smaller password database on the computer and

syncronise this one instead of coping an entire database with all the passwords that you use to

your smartphone. Also, since all the passwords are protected by your master password, it is

vital to use very strong password for your Keepass database.

12.2.3.4 Sending Email from your Smartphone
In this section we will briefly discuss the use of email on smartphones. In the first instance,

consider if you really need to use your smartphone to access your email. Securing a computer

and its content is generally simpler than doing so for a mobile device such as a smartphone. A

smartphone is more susceptible to theft, monitoring and intrusion.

If it is absolutely vital that you access your email on your smartphone, there are actions you

can take to minimize the risks.

 Do not rely on smartphone as your primary means for accessing your email.

Downloading (and removing) emails from an email server and storing them only on

your smartphone is not advised. You can set up your email application to use only

copies of emails.

 If you use email encryption with some of your contacts, consider installing it on your

smartphone, too. The additional benefit is that encrypted emails will remain secret if

the phone falls into wrong hands.

Storing your private encryption key on your mobile device may seem risky. But the benefit of

being able to send and store emails securely encrypted on the mobile device might outweigh

the risks. Consider creating a mobile-only encrytpion key-pair (using APG) for your use on

your smartphone, so you do not copy your encryption private key from your computer to the

mobile device. Note that this requires that you ask people you communicate with to also

encrypt emails using your mobile-only encryption key.

12.2.3.5 Capturing Media with your Smartphone
Capturing pictures, video or audio with your Smartphone can be a powerful means to

document and share important events. However, it is important to be careful and respectful of

privacy and safety of those pictured, filmed or recorded. For example, if you take photos or

record video or audio of an important event, it might be dangerous to you or to those who

139




appear in the recordings, if your phone fell into the wrong hands. In this case, these

suggestions may be helpful:

 Have a mechanism to securely upload recorded media files to protected online

location and remove them from the phone instantly (or as soon as you can) after

recording.

 Use tools to blur the faces of those appearing in the images or videos or distort the

voices of audio or videos recordings and store only blurred and distorted copies of

media files on your mobile device.

 Protect or remove meta information about time and place within the media files.

Guardian Project has created a FOSS app called ObscuraCam to detect faces on photos and

blur them. You can choose the blurring mode and what to blur, of course. Obscuracam also

deletes the original photos and if you have set up a server to upload the captured media, it

provides easy functionality to upload it.

12.2.3.6 Accessing the Internet Securely from your Smartphone
As discussed in our guide How to keep your Internet communication private and our

guide How to remain anonymous and bypass censorship on the Internet, access to content

on the Internet, or publishing material online such as photos or videos, leaves many traces of

who and where you are and what you are doing. This may put you at risk. Using your

smartphone to communicate with the Internet magnifies this risk.

Through Wi-Fi or Mobile Data

Smartphones allow you to control how you access the Internet: via a wireless connection

provided by an access point (such as an internet cafe), or via a mobile data connection, such

as GPRS, EDGE, or UMTS provided by your mobile network operator.

Using a WiFi connection reduces the traces of data you may be leaving with your mobile

phone service provider (by not having it connected with your mobile phone subscription).

However, sometimes a mobile data connection is the only way to get online. Unfortunately

mobile data connection protocols (like EDGE or UMTS) are not open standards. Independent

developers and security engineers cannot examine these protocols to see how they are being

implemented by mobile data carriers.

In some countries mobile access providers operate under different legislation than internet

service providers, which can result in more direct surveillance by governments and carriers.

140




Regardless of which path you take for your digital communications with a smartphone, you

can reduce your risks of data exposure through the use of anonymising and encryption tools.

Anonymity of your Smartphone

To access content online anonymously, you can use an Android app called Orbot. Orbot

channels your internet communication through Tor's anonymity network.

Another app, Orweb, is a web browser that has privacy enhancing features like using proxies

and not keeping a local browsing history. Orbot and Orweb together circumvent web filters

and firewalls, and offer anonymous browsing.

Proxies

The mobile version of Firefox – Firefox mobile can be equipped with proxy add-ons, which

direct your traffic to a proxy server. From there your traffic goes to the site you are

requesting. This is helpful in cases of censorship, but still may reveal your requests unless the

connection from your client to the proxy is encrypted. We recommend the Proxy Mobile add-

on (also from Guardian Project, which makes proxying with Firefox easy. Is also the only

way to channel Firefox mobile communications to Orbot and use the Tor network.

12.2.3.7Advanced Smart Phone Security
Get Full Access to your Smartphone

Most Smartphones are capable of more than their installed operating system, manufacturers'

software (firmware), or the mobile operators' programmes allow. Conversely, some

functionalities are 'locked in' so the user is not capable of controlling or altering these

functions, and they remain out of reach. In most cases those functionalities are unnecessary

for smartphone users. There are however, some applications and functionalities that can

enhance the security of data and communications on a smartphone. Also there are some other

existing functionalities that can be removed to avoid security risks.

For this, and other reasons, some smartphone users choose to manipulate the various software

and programs running the smartphone in order to gain appropriate privileges to allow them to

install enhanced functionalities, or remove or reduce other ones.

The process of overcoming the limits imposed by mobile carriers, or manufacturers of

operating systems on a smartphone is called rooting (in case of Android devices), or

jailbreaking (in case of iOS devices, like iPhone or iPad). Typically, successful rooting or

jailbreaking will result in your having all the privileges needed to install and use additional

141




applications, make modifications to otherwise locked-down configurations, and total control

over data storage and memory of the smartphone.

WARNING: Rooting or jailbreaking may not be a reversible process, and it requires

experience with software installation and configuration. Consider the following:

 There is a risk of making your smartphone permanently inoperable, or 'bricking' it (i.e.

turning it into a 'brick').

 The manufacturer or mobile carrier warranty may be voided.

 In some places, this process maybe illegal.

But if you are careful, a rooted device is a straightforward way to gain more control over your

smartphone to make it much more secure.

Alternative Firmwares

Firmware refers to programmes that are closely related to the particular device. They are in

cooperation with the device's operating system and are responsible for basic operations of the

hardware of your smartphone, such as the speaker, microphone, cameras, touchscreen,

memory, keys, antennas, etc.

If you have an Android device, you might consider installing a firmware alternative to further

enhance your control of the phone. Note that in order to install alternative firmware, you need

to root your phone.

An example of an alternative firmware for an Android phone is Cyanogenmod which, for

example, allows you to uninstall applications from the system level of your phone (i.e. those

installed by the phone's manufacturer or your mobile network operator). By doing so, you can

reduce the number of ways in which your device can be monitored, such as data that is sent to

your service provider without your knowledge.

In addition, Cyanogenmod ships by default with an OpenVPN application, which can be

tedious to install otherwise. VPN (Virtual Private Network) is one of the ways to securely

proxy your internet communication (see below).

Cyanogenmod also offers an Incognito browsing mode in which history of your

communication is not recorded on your smartphone.

142




Full Device Encryption

If your phone is rooted you may consider encrypting it's entire data storage or creating a

volume on the Smartphone to protect some information on the phone.

Luks Manager allows easy, on-the-fly strong encryption of volumes with an user-friendly

interface. We highly recommend that you install this tool before you start storing important

data on your Android device and use the Encrypted Volumes that the Luks Manager provides

to store all your data.

Virtual Private Network(VPN) Security

A VPN provides an encrypted tunnel through the internet between your device and a VPN

server. This is called a tunnel, because unlike other encrypted traffic, like https, it hides all

services, protocols, and contents. A VPN connection is set up once, and only terminates when

you decide.

Note that since all your traffic goes through the proxy or VPN server, an intermediary only

needs to have access to the proxy to analyze your activities. Therefore it is important to

carefully choose amongst proxy services and VPN services. It is also advisable to use

different proxies and/or VPNs since distributing your data streams reduces the impact of a

compromised service.

ACTIVITIES

1. Find out more about jailbreaking over internet.

2. Find and use the feature of “off-the –record” option in your chat application and observe

     what difference it makes.

3. Download and use Skype to make a video call to your friend.

4.  Find out more about ObscuraCam over internet.

RECOMENDED VIDEOS

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCObM4PBTVk

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8bCyRCqK0k



143




References


Barry M. Leiner, V. G. (s.j.). Brief History of the Internet. Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015 uit

http://www.internetsociety.org/internet/what-internet/history-internet/brief-history-internet

available under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported

License.

Bunting, S., & Wei, W. (2006). The Official EnCE: EnCase Certified ExaminorStudy Guide.

Wiley Publishing Inc.

Castillo, F. (2007). Reshipping Fraud - A Home Business Con.

C-DAC. (2014). National Intelligence Grid : NATGRID.

CERT-In. (2014). Indian Computer Emergency Response Team.

Chander, M. (2013). National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre

(NCIIPC): Role, Charter & Responsibilities.

Chowdhury, S., Nair, S., & Johnson. (2008). The curious case of Ken Haywood. The Indian

Express.

Cone, M. (2011, Dec. 17). How to Configure Your Mac's Firewall. Onttrek Oct. 24, 2015 uit

MACINSTRUCT: http://www.macinstruct.com/node/165 available under Creative Commons

Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.

Cyber Crime Investigation Cell, Mumbai. (s.j.). Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015 uit

http://cybercellmumbai.gov.in/

(2014). CYBER CRIME, CYBER SECURITY AND RIGHT TO PRIVACY. New Delhi: LOK

SABHA SECRETARIAT.

CYBER SECURITY MANIFESTO 2.0. (2012, Oct. 01). Onttrek Sep. 26, 2015 uit

cybersecuritymanifesto: http://cybersecuritymanifesto.com/

Email tips. (s.j.). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit Digital Survival:

https://survival.tacticaltech.org/internet/email/tips available under a Creative Commons

Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported License.

144




Farberov, S. (2014). Russian hackers attacked US financial system stealing gigabytes of data

in suspected retaliation for Ukraine sanctions. Mail Online.

Fisher, M. (2013). Syrian hackers claim AP hack that tipped stock market by $136 billion. Is

it terrorism? The Washington Post.

Gallagher, S. (2013, Oct. 02). We are not who we are. Onttrek Sep. 26, 2015 uit Security

Blog: https://securityblog.redhat.com/tag/two-factor-authentication/ available under a

Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.

Glass, E. (2003). The NTLM Authentication Protocol and Security Support Provider. Onttrek

Sep. 26, 2015 uit Sourceforge: http://davenport.sourceforge.net/ntlm.html available under

permission by the owner to use, copy, modify, and distribute this document for any purpose

and without any fee.

Gollin, G. (2003). Unconventional University Diplomas from Online Vendors: Buying a

Ph.D.University That Doesn’t Exist.

Gonsalves, A. (2014). How hackers used Google to steal corporate data.

www.infoworld.com.

Gordon, S., & Ford, R. (2003). Cyberterrorism? Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015 uit

http://www.symantec.com/avcenter/reference/cyberterrorism.pdf

(1998). How Email Works. In P. Grall, How Internet Works (bl. 85). Que Corporation.

Gupta, A. (2011, March 01). Digital Forensic Analysis Using BackTrack, Part 1. Onttrek Sep.

26, 2015 uit opensourceforu: http://opensourceforu.efytimes.com/2011/03/digital-forensic-

analysis-using-backtrack-part-1/ available under Creative Commons Attribution-

NonCommercial 3.0 Unported License.

Hacker (computer security). (Nov.). Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015 uit 2015:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hacker_(computer_security) available under the Creative

Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License.

Havercan, P. (2015, July 17). A plain person's guide to Secure Sockets Layer. Onttrek Sep.

26, 2015 uit http://peter.havercan.net/computing/plain-persons-guide-to-secure-sockets-

layer.html available under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0

International License.

145




Hazen, S. (2014). Hackers Used Police Tool to Steal Celeb Photos. NEWSER.

How do I know if a website is secure? (2015, Oct.). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit ccm.net:

http://ccm.net/faq/2-how-do-i-know-if-a-website-is-secure available under the Creative

Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - ShareAlike 3.0 France license.

How it works. (2010, Jan. 17). Onttrek Sep. 26, 2015 uit Wikidot:

http://pychatter.wikidot.com/how-it-works available under Creative Commons Attribution-

NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 License.

How to Choose an Internet Browser. (s.j.). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit WikiHow:

http://www.wikihow.com/Choose-an-Internet-Browser available under an Attribution-

Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Creative Commons License

How to Clear Your Browser's Cache. (s.j.). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit WikiHow:

http://www.wikihow.com/Clear-Your-Browser%27s-Cache     available under an Attribution-

Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Creative Commons License

How to Reveal a Fake Facebook Account. (s.j.). Onttrek Sep. 27, 2015 uit

www.wikihow.com: http://www.wikihow.com/Reveal-a-Fake-Facebook-Account

available under an Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Creative Commons License

How to Set up 2 Step Verification in Gmail. (s.j.). Onttrek Oct. 24, 2015 uit WikiHow:

http://www.wikihow.com/Set-up-2-Step-Verification-in-Gmail available under an

Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Creative Commons License

How to Set up 2 Step Verification in Gmail. (s.j.). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit

http://www.wikihow.com/Set-up-2-Step-Verification-in-Gmail available under an

Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Creative Commons License.

Introduction to Digital Forensics. (2011, Nov. 16). Onttrek Sep. 28, 2015 uit Wikibooks:

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Introduction_to_Digital_Forensics available under the Creative

Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License

ISFS. (2004, April). Computer Forensics. Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015 uit

http://www.isfs.org.hk/publications/ComputerForensics_part1.pdf

Kaur, R. P. (2013). Statistics of Cyber Crime in India: An Overview. International Journal Of

Engineering And Computer Science , 2 (8).

146




Kerberos Authentication. (s.j.). Onttrek Sep. 26, 2015 uit Interactiva:

http://computers.interactiva.org/Security/Authentication/Kerberos/ available under a Creative

Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License

Kessler, G. C. (2001, Sep.). Steganography: Hiding Data Within Data. Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015

uit http://www.garykessler.net/library/steganography.html

Kessler, G. C. (2005, Dec.). The Role of Computer Forensics in Law Enforcement . Onttrek

Dec. 20, 2015 uit http://www.garykessler.net/library/role_of_computer_forensics.html

Kumar, M. (2014). Xiaomi Phones Secretly Sending Users' Sensetive data to Chinese Servers.

The Hacker News.

Leung, C. (s.j.). Binding a Corporate Information Protection Strategy. Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015

uit http://www.isfs.org.hk/publications/011009/Collins-CIO&CeO.pdf

Lucas, I. (2009, July 10). Password Guidelines. Onttrek Oct. 24, 2015 uit Lockdown.co.uk:

http://www.lockdown.co.uk/?pg=password_guide available under a Creative Commons

Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 License

Madhya Pradesh State Cyber Police. (2013). Recent Examples of Cyber Crime & E-

Commerce Fraud Related Investigations in India.

Mcafee. (2014). Net Losses: Estimating the Global Cost of Cybercrime. Santa Clara.

Mehnle, J. (2010, April 17). Sender Policy Framework. Onttrek Sep. 28, 2015 uit Openspf:

http://www.openspf.org/Introduction available under Creative Commons CC BY-SA 2.5

Mrunal. (2012). National Counter Terrorism Center (NCTC): Meaning, functions,

Controversy.

Nair, S. (2009). Selected Case Studies on Cyber Crime.

Nandanwar, R. (2013). Case Study of Recent Examples of Cyber Crime and E-Commerce

Fraud related Investigations involving IPR and Copyright Act.

Narayan, V. (2013). Mumbai bank hacked, Rs 2.4 crore siphoned off in 3 hours. Mumbai: The

Economic Times.

147




Nelson, B., Phillips, A., & Steuart, C. (2009). Guide to Computer Forensics and

Investigations. Cengage Learning.

Networking in Windows 7. (s.j.). Onttrek Oct. 24, 2015 uit http://www.utilizewindows.com/:

http://www.utilizewindows.com/7/networking/452-working-with-windows-firewall-in-

windows-7 available under under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-

ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

NK, V. (2015, Jan. 24). A Peek into the Top Password Managers. Onttrek Oct. 24, 2015 uit

opensourceforu.com: http://opensourceforu.efytimes.com/2015/01/peek-top-password-

managers/ available under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported

License.

Nolan, R., O‟Sullivan, C., Branson, J., & Waits, C. (2005). First Responders guide to

Computer Forensic. CERT Training and Education.

Password Authentication Protocol. (2015, July 17). Onttrek Sep. 26, 2015 uit WIKIPEDIA:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Password_Authentication_Protocol available under the Creative

Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License.

Press Information Bureau. (2006). India-US cyber security Forum - Fact Sheet.

PROTECT THE SENSITIVE FILES ON YOUR COMPUTER. (s.j.). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit

SECURITY IN-A-BOX: https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/secure-file-storage available

under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported License.

PROTECT YOURSELF AND YOUR DATA WHEN USING SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES.

(s.j.). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit securityinabox.org: https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/social-

networking available under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported

License.

PTI. (2013). http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/govt-launches-crime-tracking-pilot-

project/article4272857.ece. The Hindu.

Quirk, S. (2014, Mar. 13). Concordia Password Security Policy. Onttrek Sep. 26, 2015 uit

http://kb.cu-portland.edu/Password+Security available under a Creative Commons Attribution

3.0 License.

148




Ranger, S. (2014, June 09). Organised cybercrime groups are now as powerful as nations.

Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015 uit http://www.zdnet.com/organised-cybercrime-groups-are-now-as-

powerful-as-nations-7000030323/

Recognise scam or hoax emails and websites. (s.j.). Onttrek Sep. 27, 2015 uit

https://www.communications.gov.au: https://www.communications.gov.au/what-we-

do/internet/stay-smart-online/your-identity/recognise-scam-or-hoax-emails-and-websites

available under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 International License.

Rocha, L. (2012, Dec. 21). COMPUTER SECURITY INCIDENT HANDLING – 6 STEPS.

Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015 uit Count Upon Security:

http://countuponsecurity.com/2012/12/21/computer-security-incident-handling-6-steps/

Rusen, C. A. (2014, Sep. 09). How to start & use the Windows firewall with advance security.

Onttrek Oct. 24, 2015 uit DigitalCitizen: http://www.digitalcitizen.life/gain-additional-

control-using-windows-firewall-advanced-security available under Creative Commons

Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 4.0 International.

Rusen, C. A. (2014, Sep. 26). How to Start & Use The Windows Firewall with Advanced

Security. Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit http://www.digitalcitizen.lif:

http://www.digitalcitizen.life/gain-additional-control-using-windows-firewall-advanced-

security available under Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 4.0

International.

Selecting a strong password. (2015, Sep. 10). Onttrek Sep. 26, 2015 uit Wordpress:

https://en.support.wordpress.com/selecting-a-strong-password/ available under a Creative

Commons Sharealike license.

Shubert, A. (2011). Cyber warfare: A different way to attack Iran's reactors. CNN.

Singh, G., Sharma, A., Rampal, K., Kular, R., Gupta, S., Sarita, R., et al. (2013). India Risk

Survey 2013. Pinkerton and Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry

(FICCI).

Srinath, B. J. (2006). Cyber Security Awareness for Protection of National Information

Infrastructure. Dept. of Information Technology. Ministry of Communication & Information

Technology, Govt. if India.

149




Stewart, W. (2000, Jan. 07). How Email Works. Onttrek Sep. 28, 2015 uit

http://www.livinginternet.com/: http://www.livinginternet.com/e/ew.htm available under a

Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike License

Swain, B. (2009, July). What are malware, viruses, Spyware, and cookies, and what

differentiates them ? Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015 uit

http://www.symantec.com/connect/articles/what-are-malware-viruses-spyware-and-cookies-

and-what-differentiates-them

Talukder, M. i. (s.j.). Free Antivirus. Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit

http://shaifulaueo.blogspot.in/p/free-antivirus_13.html available under a Creative Commons

Attribution 3.0.license.

The Home Computer Security Centre. (2009, july 10). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit

http://www.lockdown.co.uk: http://www.lockdown.co.uk/?pg=password_guide available

under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 License.

The Indian Express. (2008). Latest terror mail traced to Mumbai college. Mumbai: The

Indian Express.

The Invention of Internet. (s.j.). Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015 uit

http://www.history.com/topics/inventions/invention-of-the-internet

The Telegraph. (2015, Dec. 06). Onttrek Dec. 17, 2015 uit

http://www.telegraphindia.com/1151207/jsp/business/story_57045.jsp#.VnJcINJ95dg

Times of India. (2009). Another techie held for duping Brainvisa. Pune: Times of India.

Tips for buying online. (2015, Oct. 02). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit Tips for buying online:

https://www.qld.gov.au/law/your-rights/consumer-rights-complaints-and-scams/consumer-

advice-rights-and-responsibilties/tips-to-become-a-smarter-shopper/tips-for-buying-online/

available under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Australia (CC BY) licence.

Understanding Authentication. (2008, Feb. 14). Onttrek Sep. 26, 2015 uit Go4Experts:

http://www.go4expert.com/articles/understanding-authentication-t8842/ available under

Creative Commons with Attribution Required.

150




Urbas, G. (2012). Copyright, Crime and Computers: New Legislative Frameworks

forIntellectual Property Rights Enforcement. Journal of International Commercial Law and

Technology , 7 (1), 11-26.

US-CERT. (2014). Backoff Point-of-Sale Malware:Alert (TA14-212A). United States

Computer Emergency Rediness Team.

US-CERT. (2008). Computer Forensics . Onttrek Dec. 20, 2015 uit https://www.us-

cert.gov/sites/default/files/publications/forensics.pdf

USE MOBILE PHONES AS SECURELY AS POSSIBLE. (s.j.). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit

https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/smartphones available under a Creative Commons

Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported License.

Verma, D. (2012, Nov. 05). How To Identify Fake EMail And Trace Sender's Location.

Onttrek Sep. 27, 2015 uit http://www.usethistip.com:

http://www.usethistip.com/2012/11/how-to-identify-fake-email-and-trace.html available

under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License.

What Is A Software Patch? (2013, Nov. 08). Onttrek oct. 29, 2015 uit OSSWATCH:

http://oss-watch.ac.uk/resources/softwarepatch available under a Creative Commons

Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

Working With Windows Firewall in Windows 7. (s.j.). Onttrek Oct. 29, 2015 uit

http://www.utilizewindows.com: http://www.utilizewindows.com/7/networking/452-working-

with-windows-firewall-in-windows-7

Yasmeen, A. (2013). Natgrid will deter terror. The Hindu dated15 Dec. 2013.

151
















Cyber
Security

for
beginners



Cyber Security for Beginners

Start here

What Cyber
Security for
Beginners is all
about
www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners 3

Welcome to the most practical cyber security course you’ll attend!

I’m Andra, and along with the Heimdal Security team, we’ll take you
on a wild ride in the universe of cyber security. We’ll check all the
important “sights” - no fluff, no detours, just the stuff you can
really use!

So I think you’ll agree with me when I say:

It’s REALLY difficult to try to cut through the noise and get just the
information you need when it comes to cyber security.

We know there’s waaay too much stuff online about the subject,
from really technical articles to big data breaches suffered by
Forbes Top 100 companies.

“So how can I find relevant, actionable advice?”, you may ask

I believe in curated content and its power to SAVE you TIME and
EFFORT by providing the right insights at the right moment.

So here’s what I want to do for you: provide a guide to help you
increase the security of your digital assets with as little hassle as
possible!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Table of contents 4

Now it’s time to kick things off with an overview of the
action-packed lessons you’ll explore in this course:

1. Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour Pag. 8

2. The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget Pag. 20

3. No more technical gibberish! Master basic security Pag. 35
terms in 20 minutes

4. Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 Pag. 55
minutes. Here’s how to master your password
security.

5. How do I choose the best antivirus? We have just the Pag. 71
thing for you

6. Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect Pag. 98
you (because antivirus is not enough)

7. Do you know about these security holes in your Pag. 109
system?

8. Stop procrastinating! Read this & Get your data to Pag. 117
safety

9. You need data encryption (even if you’re not a Pag. 125
security specialist)

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Table of contents 5

10. And the cyber security specialists said: secure thy Pag. 138
browsers or...

11. Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Pag. 168
Wi-fi? Find out

12. Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Pag. 188
Here’s how

13. Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the Pag. 210
safe way

14. “Nobody understands the cloud!” - is that you? Pag. 248
How to keep your cloud-stored data safe

15. Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts Pag. 256
like a Pro

16. Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber Pag. 276
criminals actions

17. What your kids & parents need to learn about Pag. 287
cyber security

18. No-nonsense cyber security: 10 things you never Pag. 304
know were necessary

19. Cyber Security Ninja level achieved! Pag. 313

Long list? Not to worry!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners 6

Your time will be well spent and I promise that we’ll do our best to
make this course fit your needs and expectations.

Anyone, anywhere, anytime can become a victim of cyber hacking
(including you), but there’s a lot you can do to increase your
chances of not getting hacked.  And I’m here to help you become a
Cyber Security Ninja!

As a Cyber Security Ninja, will I have 100%, bulletproof, state of the
art security by the end of the course?

We’re not afraid to say this: the answer is NO.

Any security expert will agree that there is no such thing as
impenetrable cyber security, simply because things constantly
change.

But people who stay safe online do one thing very well:

They take the time to create a system that protects them, which,
once put in place, doesn’t require much time to maintain or upgrade
every now and then.

The secret to keeping your data safe from cyber criminals is to not
only read the material in this course, but also ACT on it.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners 7

So here is my first BONUS for you (more will come along the way)
and your first actionable item:

Start by assessing your personal information security level by
using this quick checklist.

You can download it, complete it and see what things you could still
improve. And be sure to keep it to see how much progress you’ll
make by the end of the course.

Like I said, this course will be as hands-on as possible, so ACTION
IS KEY to dramatically improving your safety and your data’s safety
online!

If you have any questions along the way or need extra information,
please feel free to contact me at any moment at
aza@heimdalsecurity.com and I’ll get back you in 24 hours at most.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 1  /19

Security 101:
cover your
basics in less
than 1 hour



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 9

Before I start this lesson, let me tell you that me and the Heimdal
Security team will be next to you along the way in this cyber security

Lesson 1 course and we’ll discover together the online security information
which will improve your Internet safety knowledge.

And since I want to keep this content easy to understand and apply, I
will try to "translate" the technical cyber security terms along the way
in a language that we can both relate to.

Since this is the first actual lesson, my immediate priority is to make
sure your system is protected right now.

To accomplish this, I organized an actionable guide in 11 simple steps
that you can follow to greatly improve your security FAST!

11 Steps to Improve Your Computer Security in Less
Than 1 Hour

1. Use strong passwords for your email and social media
accounts

There are a few things you need to pay attention to when
dealing with setting good passwords for your online ac-
counts. First of all, don’t use the same password in more
than one online account!

The reason is quite easy to guess: if one of your online
accounts is hacked, then the others will soon follow. By

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 10

using different passwords, you reduce the potential loss
you could suffer in case this privacy breach takes place.

Lesson 1
One of the best ways to ensure your online accounts are
not accessed by anyone else but you is to use the 2 step
verification method. Activating this method means that
you will have to enter, besides your credentials, a code
sent to your phone. Using this method, you can protect
your private information from social media accounts or
important data from your email account.

We have a step-by-step guide dedicated to password
management, coming up in lesson 4!

2. Stay safe from spyware threats with a specialized securi-
ty solution

First, let’s establish fast, what exactly is spyware? Spyware
refers to software which is capable of installing on your
computer and starts opening pop-up windows, redirects
your browser to malicious websites and monitors your
browsing sessions affecting your private Internet connec-
tions. (You’ll figure out all this semi-technical gibberish in
lesson 3, I promise!)
There are a few signs which should trigger a sign of
alarm:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 11

computer is slow when opening programs or running
some applications

Lesson 1 pop-up windows appear all the time
a new toolbar may appear in your web browser
the Home page of your web browser has been modified
the search engine in your web browser has been changed
error messages start to appear unexpectedly

To stay safe from spyware, use one of the popular an-
ti-spyware products available online. A few security solu-
tions capable of removing spyware from your system are
Malwarebytes, Spybot Search and Destroy, Lavasoft’s
Ad-Aware, etc.

At the same time, simply follow these good security prac-
tices:

Don’t click any suspicious links or pop-up windows
Don’t answer to unexpected answers or simply choose
No
Be careful when downloading free applications

3. Keep your Windows operating system and your
vulnerable applications up to date

I am quite sure you read lately many security news
regarding software vulnerabilities and you ask yourself:
what can I do?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 12

Many people don’t take this news seriously, since most
security solutions are mainly created for malicious soft-

Lesson 1 ware.

But software vulnerabilities are not something you can
ignore. Taking advantage of software vulnerabilities pres-
ent in popular programs and applications is a popular
method used by online criminals.

So, if you know you use popular software, like Java,
Adobe Flash, Adobe Shockwave, Adobe Acrobat Reader,
Quicktime or popular web browsers like Chrome, Mozilla
Firefox or Internet Explorer, always make sure you have
the latest available patches.

You need to understand that these software solutions are
always under threat from criminal minds, so don’t rely on
your memory and install a dedicated solution to perform
these actions for you.

4. Use a standard user account in your Windows
operating system to go online

Different levels of rights and privileges are available for
the Windows user accounts. I recommend using a stan-
dard Windows user account to access Internet.

If you use a standard account in your Windows operating

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 13

system, you make sure that a piece of malware which
could infect your limited user account will not be capable

Lesson 1 of doing great damage to your system.

Only an administrator account can make significant
changes to your system, like deleting important Windows
related files or installing malicious software. If you use
your standard account, you will have to provide the cre-
dentials for the administrator account every time you
make an important change.

5. Don’t turn OFF your UAC (User Account Control)

I must admit, this is something I also have the tendency
to do:

Turn the UAC off as soon as I install/reinstall my Win-
dows operating system.

But should I do it? Does this make my system more secure?
The answer is No.
What if, instead of completely turning it off, maybe you can
only decrease the level of protection by using the provided
slider?

The role of UAC is to monitor what changes occur on the
system and when an important event takes place, like
installing or removing an application.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 14

The UAC makes sure you have administrator permissions
and that you really want to take that action. In case your

Lesson 1 Windows user account has been infected, UAC helps you
by keeping suspicious software from making changes on
the system.

6. Go online with a secure browser

Your web browser is the main tool you use to access
Internet and you should pay a great deal of attention to
secure it correctly. At the same time, vulnerabilities from
web browsers are like open invitations to hackers. By
using these open doors, online criminals attempt to
retrieve private data from your system.

To secure your online privacy, you can follow these rec-
ommendations:

Choose the latest version for your browser and make sure
you have the latest security patches installed. This is
important and keeps your system secure from online
criminals’ attacks.

Increase your privacy and security settings in your brows-
er. Epic, user-friendly how to’s coming up in lesson 10!

Choose a private browsing session when you access a
website you are not sure about. Choosing this navigation

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 15

mode will prevent your browsing session details from
being stored.

Lesson 1
Use secure websites for sensitive financial operations. To
visit a secure website, make sure the web address starts
with “https://”. The “s” comes from “secure socket layer“,
and it indicates you are connected to a website where
data, which is sent and received, is encrypted.

7. Don’t trust public and free Wi-fi networks

Be careful when connecting to public and free wireless
networks. One of the favorite methods used by online
criminals to retrieve your credentials is by using wireless
sniffers to access data sent over unprotected networks.

One way to increase your security is by using a “private
browsing” session, this way you make sure your creden-
tials won’t be stored locally. Nevertheless, this won’t stop
the Internet Service Provider or anyone else “listening”
out there to catch your private communication.

With the increasing danger of online theft and lack of
privacy on popular social platforms, such as Facebook,
you need to safeguard your freedom and protect your
Internet activities. One way of keeping your browsing
session private and secure is to use a VPN (that is a Vir-
tual Private Network).

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 16

Getting your home Wi-Fi and devices in tip top shape for
online browsing is what lesson 11 is all about. Cyber

Lesson 1 criminals won’t know what stopped them!

8. Check the link before you click it

Phishing threats are usually done by using email messag-
es that apparently come from financial institutions or
well-known banking websites. These attempts to retrieve
private information from a user provide links in the mes-
sage that direct the victim to a fake web location, con-
trolled by online criminals.

To make sure you won’t be infected by clicking on dan-
gerous links, hover the mouse over the link to see if you
are directed to a legitimate location. If you were sup-
posed to reach your online banking website, but the link
indicates “hfieo88.net“, then you should not click the link.

So, how can I know where I’ll end up if I click it?

To make sure you are going to the right direction, use a
free tool such as Redirect Detective. This tool will allow
you to see the complete path of a redirected link. Another
tool which can provide very helpful in checking suspi-
cious links is the reliable URL checker, VirusTotal:
https://virustotal.com/.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 17

9. Don’t forget to log out

Lesson 1 Don’t simply close your browser when you are done with
your financial operation or when you exit your online ac-
count.

You need to remember that you have to log out from your
online account. If you don’t do this, especially if you are
in a public location, the next person who opens the Face-
book account, for example, will access directly your Face-
book profile.

I recommend you using a virtual browser for your finan-
cial operations to keep your online banking secure. Pri-
vate browsing sessions are also recommended if you
want to prevent authentication credentials (or cookies)
from being stored.

10. Don’t post private information on your social media
accounts
Exposing personal details may lead hackers into finding
your financial information. For the same reason, check
your kids’ social media behavior to make sure they won’t
expose private information that may possibly be used
against you, in phishing attacks.

Lesson number 13 is packed with ready-to-use advice on
how to stay safe while using social media.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 18

11. Don’t access questionable web locations

Lesson 1 Don’t access or download content from unknown or con-
troversial locations. Access websites that proved to be
safe and you know you can trust.

Nevertheless, this is not a guarantee that you won’t get
infected. Nowadays, cyber-criminals exploit vulnerabili-
ties in legitimate websites and inject malicious code, as
to perform drive-by attacks on unsuspecting visitors.

It may be a free screen saver or a browser toolbar that
may infect you with a keylogger (definition coming up in
lesson 3!) that can record and send your personal data to
cyber-criminals.

To make sure your system is protected and your creden-
tials are not exposed, install a security product, which
can detect and stop hackers from stealing valuable infor-
mation from your system.

Thanks for sticking with us until the end!

We tried to cover the minimum steps that can be taken in
a short period of time to greatly increase a system's se-
curity.

Though you may not have the time right now to follow

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 19

them all, just remember you can always go back to this
paper when you feel the need to go over the info again.

Lesson 1

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 2  /19

The 10 Internet
Security Myths
You Need to
Forget



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 21

The previous lesson covered the minimum steps you need to take to
stay safe online.

Lesson 2
Now, I know there is a lot of conflicting information out there, which
creates controversy, but these stories or “myths” are now part of Inter-
net culture and it’s difficult to separate fact from fiction, especially
when so many people treat them as “real”.

Since it is a confusing topic that covers so many areas on the web, it is
difficult to see beyond half-truths or falsehoods. The information and
data in the online world shifts and covers new interests, therefore our
security perspective must also keep up and separate fact from fiction.

Here are the top 10 most common security myths that need to be
demolished, before you take any security action on our systems.

10 Internet Security Myths That You Need To Forget

1. This can’t happen to me, only important or rich people
are targeted.

This security myth is called by many security experts
security through obscurity.

Simply said, the Internet is such a big place that no one
wants to target you. And even if someone would try to
attack your system, there wouldn’t be too much valuable
data to be stolen.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 22

In most cases, the user who embraces this kind of think-
Lesson 2 ing doesn’t actually want to lose time or money to ad-

dress this security issue for the system.

The problem with this type of wishful thinking is that it
doesn’t take long until an IT criminal disables your
system by using one of your system’s vulnerabilities.

This happens because it is not about how you are, it’s
only about your system protection level.

Using automated tools, online criminals probe systems to
discover vulnerable computers and networks to take advan-
tage of.

And it’s not just about your personal information they are
after: your Internet-connected system is also a valuable
asset they can use for their malicious actions.

Even if you think there is no important personal or finan-
cial data on the system, a potential identity theft or IT
criminal can still use the little data discovered and relate
it to other information taken from other sources in order
to have a complete picture.
Why take a risk when there are so many protection products
and even free tools to keep you safe from malware?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 23

So, don’t trust the odds that tell you that you should be
Lesson 2 safe out there.

2. Install this security application and you’ll be fine.

This security myth is also called the search for the magic
bullet that can solve all your system security.

A user that pays for a security program has high expecta-
tions and hopes all his system security to be covered by
just installing the purchased program. This myth rep-
resents a false image of what it means to have a com-
plete system security.

Trusting one security program to cover your system, your
online actions, keep you safe against data and financial
stealing malware and other non-traditional attack vectors
means that you place too much trust in a single line of
defense.

To have an antivirus software or any other security pro-
gram doesn’t mean to cover the whole Internet security
front, though there are some antivirus products that try
to create the impression that everything is protected by
just installing that single program.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 24

To have complete protection of your system and your
online actions, you should start by using an antivirus

Lesson 2 program that protects you against classical threats, such
as viruses, worms, Trojans or phishing. At the same time,
you also need solutions against spam, data and financial
stealing malware, a parental control tool and a good fire-
wall.

More than anything, you need to stay up to date with se-
curity and the latest news and reject false stories that
promise total protection by installing a single security
program.

Because cyber criminal attacks are evolving faster than
antivirus can, next-generation anti-hacking tools have
emerged! And I’ll tell you all about them in lesson 6.

3. I don’t need security programs because I don’t access
unsafe locations.
I’m sure you heard about this one and you have those
friends that believe simple common sense is all that is
necessary to keep you safe from malware, viruses, spam,
phishing, identity theft, online attacks, etc.

How many times have you heard someone saying: I don’t
need antivirus protection, I’m too smart to fall for those

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 25

tricks!

Lesson 2 And if it’s about email attachments, risky web locations
or pop-up ads, that may be correct.

But is that all?
What about malware attacks and vulnerability checks that
are not easy to detect?
Or about malicious code hidden in legitimate websites?

To be safe online is quite similar to driving your car.

You may have common sense and pay attention to poten-
tial dangers, but can you always predict what others are
doing around you in traffic?

Now, you understand why security is important.

4. I set some strong and complex passwords to my ac-
counts, so I’ll be OK.
It is a common recommendation for every user to set a
strong password. Your passwords should have 10 or 20
characters and they must contain various letters and
numbers. Making the password long and complicated is
supposed to create serious difficulties for someone that
tries to break it.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 26

These complex passwords that are set nevertheless pres-
ent a major inconvenience: they are quite difficult to

Lesson 2 remember and you are forced to write them down in the
PC or on some piece of paper, which increases the risk of
unauthorized access to the account or to the operating
system. At the same time, users have a tendency to dis-
like such a strong password implementation and start to
perceive this as a burden.

Normally, most Internet users set quite easy to remember
passwords to their accounts or they use passwords
which are easy to guess.

Therefore, most passwords and credentials, which are
even used for online banking locations, are actually
sniffed and not so much cracked. Another well-known
fact is that users set the same password for different
online accounts, which makes the job much easier for an
online criminal.

The need for a good password is part of a larger security
scheme that includes security programs for classical and
non-traditional vector attacks, spam detection and
phishing attempts.
But fancy words won’t keep you safe. ACTIONS will! Pass-
word management and security is the star of lesson
number 4.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 27

5. Internet security is expensive.

I’m sure you spend some time online, running various
Lesson 2

activities, sending messages to friends on social media
accounts, purchase various items on different websites,
not to mention accessing your banking account to send
and receive money.

So, is Internet access just a simple way of wasting time and
having fun, or is it an integral part of our lives?

How difficult is it for an IT criminal to use information from
our Facebook account and correlate it with data obtained
from malicious software already installed on our system in
order to have a complete image of your life?

And, from that point, how long until your identity is stolen
and used for malicious purposes?

I am sure you heard about cases when someone’s online
identity has been stolen and money removed from the
banking account. What you don’t hear is that recovering
from this online attack takes time, even years and since
an attack can occur from any part of the world, the perpe-
trators are rarely brought to justice.

With this information in mind, should you still take a chance
online?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 28

It is true you could install free antivirus on your system
and there are many options online, but from my experi-

Lesson 2 ence I recommend using a good security product from a
big company name.

To choose the best solution, access the antivirus test
results run by established names in the security industry,
such as AV Comparatives, PC Magazine, AV-TEST or
Virus Bulletin and select the best security solution for
your system.

6. I only open emails from my friends, so I should be fine.

How many of us already received a strange email from a
friend or from a relative?

How difficult is it to spoof an email in order to display any-
one’s name as being the sender?

If you are used to these types of tricks, you may be safe
from clicking the links contained in the email or download
on your system the attachments of the email.
But for someone who is less skilled in Internet security,
just one click away from malicious software can get them
infected.

Clicking a link may send the user to a malicious website
controlled by online criminals and downloading the con-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 29

tent of the email may easily install on the system some
dangerous financial stealing malware, which remains

Lesson 2 hidden stealing banking credentials for cyber-criminals.

These types of emails may also appear like coming from
financial institutions and they can look real enough to
trick you into giving away private information from your
online account.

In this case, if you have doubts about the origin of the
email, simply contact directly the institution or your
friend and ask if they sent that particular email.

Email is part of our lives just like our phone agenda, so I’ll
teach you how to keep cyber criminals out of your inbox
in lesson 12.

7. I download and access information from trusted sources.
This keeps me safe.

This is a pretty difficult security myth to break. Most of
us think that accessing safe and secure locations will
keep us safe.

The reality is quite different. Even if you access a trusted
source, you are still vulnerable to online dangers, and I’m
not referring just to old viruses, worms or other normal
malware.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 30

In this particular case, I’m talking about a much greater
danger: malicious software developed by cyber-criminals

Lesson 2 that target our private data and financial credentials, and
which is designed to remain hidden from classical antivi-
rus detection.

This type of malware usually spreads through emails that
apparently come from a secure financial institution (or
from a friend), through drive-by downloads, malicious
content placed on secure websites that download on
your system, or simply through pop-up ads placed by
online criminals on those websites that are considered
safe to access.

To stay safe from this danger, you need an especially
designed software to protect you against financial theft
and data stealing software. This type of software offers a
complementary layer of security which the normal antivi-
rus products cannot provide. Don’t worry, I’ll tell you all
about it when time comes.

8. My social networks are safe places. Friends will be
friends.

But will they? Social media services, such as Facebook or
Twitter, brought so many people online in the last years
that it is difficult to find someone who doesn’t have at
least a single online account, at least LinkedIn (which is

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 31

focused mainly on jobs, but has recently started to devel-
op into a more interactive network).

Lesson 2
And since so many people are connected this way, online
criminals have already developed tricks and methods that
target these networks, especially with online scams and
identity theft attempts. For a complete list on online
scams, you can take a look on this article.

If online criminals can place malicious content like
drive-by downloads and pop-up ads on safe websites,
they can do the same with social media accounts.

Who doesn’t have that friend in the list that clicked an offer
on a fake page spreading it after to the entire list of friends?

Another danger found on these types of social media
accounts is posed by online criminals that create fake
profiles and personas to retrieve personal information
from other users.

By collecting information (that doesn’t seem very import-
ant initially) and connecting it to other data retrieved from
other locations, the IT criminals can track online habits
and build a user persona in order to operate the identity
theft of the targeted user.

Therefore, be careful who you add to your list of friends.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 32

And remember that lesson 13 will feature need-to-know
(and especially need-to-APPLY) tips about social net-

Lesson 2 working – the safe way.

9. I don’t have important information or sensitive data on
my system. Why should I worry?

First of all, are you sure there is nothing valuable on your
system?

Did you let your browser remember all your passwords for
your online accounts, banking websites and your email ad-
dress?

How much damage can you take if your email account is
accessed?

You may think that your data is not important for a cy-
ber-criminal, but you should know they can collect and
assemble information about you from other sources as
well to have a big picture of your online habits. Later on,
they can use the information to steal your online identity
and use it against you.

And even when there is no important data for a potential
criminal on your system, they still can use your device for
various purposes.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 33

They can use your system’s hard disk to store illegal con-
tent, install a bot to use your computer in a coordinated

Lesson 2 online attack, host phishing content or share criminal
materials. At the same time, they can use your system’s
resources, such as your Internet connection to access
remote websites or your email address to send spam to
your list of friends.

Are you worried now?

10. In case I get infected, I will see that for sure.

Well, don’t be so sure about this.

In the past, when a computer started running slow and
pop-ups appeared all over the screen, maybe you could
tell. But today, cyber-criminal methods have evolved and
increased their efficiency that in most cases, a normal
user can’t tell his system is involved in spam campaigns
or coordinated online attacks.

The malicious software is built to be undetectable and
untraceable by antivirus products, retrieving private
information without you even noticing. Designed to evade
normal detection systems and working in the back-
ground, the latest data stealing malware retrieves private
data like credit card details and account logins without
leaving visual evidence.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  The 10 Internet Security Myths You Need to Forget 34

But fear not! For I have designed lesson 16 to help you
detect and block malicious attempts to hack and control

Lesson 2 your device!

We tried to cover the main security myths that exist in the
online world, stories that actually appeared because we
try to find easy solutions and simple answers to our se-
curity fears.

Though you may not have the time right now to discover
them all, just remember you can always go back to this
lesson when you feel the need to go over the info again.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 3  /19

No more
technical
gibberish!
Master basic
security terms
in 20 minutes



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 36

Hi there,

Lesson 3 In the last lesson, we talked about 10 Internet security myths that are
worth tossing to trash.

Now that we got that mess out of the way, we’re about to dive into the
“meat” of the course, and I plan to share insider knowledge with you
throughout the next lessons.

From my experience, when reading about cyber security, 2 things can
happen:

1. You can either become fascinated with the subject and make it a bit of
a (necessary) hobby…

2. Or you can be put off by the technical lingo you don’t understand and
just drop the whole thing.

Learn to speak “cyber security” in less than 20 minutes!

In the time it would take you to eat 4 sandwiches (depending on how
big the sandwich really is), you can learn 18 essential information
security terms and gain the basic knowledge you need.

And you’ll acquire one more skill: understanding how cyber criminals
think and act! Get inside the mind of the enemy, so you can beat them
at their own game.

So let’s get to it:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 37

18 essential cyber security terms you REALLY
need to know

Lesson 3

1. Antispyware Software

Anti-spyware software is used in detecting, blocking
and/or removing spyware attempts.
Spyware is a type of software that seeks to gather your
personal information, without your permission. It has the
capability to take over your computer entirely! The infor-
mation it collects is then sent to a third party without
your consent.

There 4 main different types of spyware:

system monitors,
Trojans,
adware,
and tracking cookies.

Spyware is mainly used for tracking a user’s movements
online and serving annoying and dangerous pop-up ads.

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

Your system can get infected with spyware if you visit
certain websites, by pop-up messages that ask you to
download an application or program (told you they’re
evil!), through security holes in the browser or in other

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 38

software, etc.

Lesson 3 Usually, spyware is well hidden and it’s also difficult to
observe. You might notice a spyware infection when the
virus starts using your system’s resources and slows it
down in a way that’ll make you really, really angry.

2. Antivirus Software

Antivirus software, sometimes called an anti-malware
program (you can also call it AV if you want to show off),
is computer software used to prevent, detect and remove
malicious software.

Antivirus protects your computer from a large number of
threats, such as ransomware, rootkits, Trojans, spyware,
phishing attacks or botnets.

Without getting technical, let’s just say that the way anti-
virus scans for infections is not really coping with current
threats. Cyber criminals are smart. Really, really smart!
And their attacks are vicious, so just remember that anti-
virus is not enough and you need something more to
keep you safe.

But that doesn’t mean you don’t need antivirus. YOU DO,
trust me! But you need other stuff too and I’ll tell you
more about that later on.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 39

software, etc.

Lesson 3 Usually, spyware is well hidden and it’s also difficult to
observe. You might notice a spyware infection when the
virus starts using your system’s resources and slows it
down in a way that’ll make you really, really angry.

3. Cyber-Attack

A cyber-attack is classified as any type of offensive
action used by cyber criminals to deploy malicious code
in your system with the purpose of stealing, altering, de-
stroying or taking any advantage from this action.

Cyber-attacks can target both people and things. ANY-
WHERE. ANYTIME.  Individual users, computer networks,
information systems, IT infrastructure of all types and
sizes – no one is safe! (And I’m not being dramatic about
it.)

And smarter cyber criminals launch stronger attacks,
which lead to worse consequences.

4. Drive-by download

A drive-by download can refer to 2 things:

a. A download which you authorized but without un-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 40

derstanding the consequences (example: downloads
which install an unknown or counterfeit executable pro-

Lesson 3 gram, ActiveX component, or Java applet).

b. The unintentional download of a virus or malicious
software (malware) onto your computer or mobile device.

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

Drive-by downloads can happen when you visit a website,
when reading an email or by clicking on a deceptive
pop-up window.

These type of malicious downloads usually take advan-
tage of (or “exploit”) a browser, an app, or an operating
system that is out of date and has a security flaw that
has not been solved or patched.

This is why it’s crucial to constantly maintain your soft-
ware updated. (No worries, I’ll nag you about this along
the way.)

5. Exploit

An exploit is a piece of software, a chunk of data, or a set
of commands that takes advantage of a bug, glitch or
vulnerability in order for malicious purposes.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 41

Exploits can cause disruptions in the behavior of comput-
er software, hardware, or something electronic (usually

Lesson 3 computerized).

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

By using exploits, cyber criminals can gain control of
your computer.

After that, they can do pretty much what they want.

One of the ways to protect yourself from exploits is to
keep your software updated at all times (told you I’d nag
you about this!) and take all essential security measures
(which I’ll show you in this course).

6. Keylogging

Keylogging (also called keystroke logging) is a method
that cyber criminals use to record (or log) the keys you
strike on your keyboard in order to get confidential infor-
mation about you.

Of course they do this in a concealed manner, so that you
won’t know you are being monitored while typing pass-
words, addresses and other secret data on your keyboard
as usual.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 42

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

Lesson 3 Keyloggers are usually used with malicious intentions, to
steal passwords or credit card information.

Although many anti-spyware applications can detect
some software based keyloggers and quarantine, disable
or cleanse them, there is no solution that can claim to be
100% effective against this type of threat.

7. Malvertising

Malvertising (short for "malicious advertising") is the use
of online advertising to spread malware.
Cyber criminals inject malicious or malware-loaded code
into online advertising networks or legitimate websites,
which then infect your systems through clicking, redirec-
tion or drive-by downloads.

Since online ads are managed by online advertising net-
works, even a legitimate website may host an infected
web banner, although the website itself remains uncom-
promised. Some of the websites that have unknowingly
hosted malvertising are The New York Times, the London
Stock Exchange, Spotify, and The Onion.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 43

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

Lesson 3 Cyber criminals use pop-up ads, drive-by downloads, web
widgets, hidden iframes, malicious banners, and
third-party applications (example: forums, help desks,
customer relationship management systems, etc.) to de-
liver malware. This is why malvertising is so wide-spread,
affecting many users without their knowledge.

8. Malware

Malware (short for malicious software) is one of the
terms you’ll hear most often when it comes to cyber se-
curity threats. The terms defines any software used by
cyber criminals to:

disrupt computer operations,
gather sensitive information,
or unlawfully gain access to private computer systems.

Malware is characterized by its malicious intent, because
it acts stealthily to steal your information or to spy on
your computer for a long time, without your knowledge.

'Malware' is a general term used to refer to an entire cate-
gory of malicious or intrusive software, including comput-
er viruses, worms, Trojan horses, ransomware, spyware,
adware, scareware, and other harmful programs.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 44

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

Lesson 3 Malware is usually spread through executable code,
scripts, active content, and other software. The major
threat is poses comes from malware being disguised as,
or embedded in, non-malicious files, such as .jpeg,
.mpeg, .exe, .gif, .mp3 and many, many more.

You should definitely check out this list of 50+ File Exten-
sions That Are Potentially Dangerous on Windows to get
an even better idea of how malware can sneak into your
system.

9. Patching

Patching is the process of updating software to a differ-
ent, newer version. A patch is a small update released by
a software manufacturer to fix bugs in existing programs.

A patch can relate to features and usability, but is can
also include security features.

Patching is essential for your online security, because it
prevents cyber criminals from launching attacks using
Zero Day viruses (definition at #18).

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 45

10. Phishing

Lesson 3 Phishing is (yet) another method that cyber criminals use
in order to acquire sensitive information such as user-
names, passwords, and credit card details (and some-
times, indirectly, money) by posing as a trustworthy entity
in emails or other means of electronic communication.

Phishing is an example of social engineering techniques
(definition at #12) used to deceive users, and exploits the
poor usability aspects of current web security technolo-
gies.

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

A phishing email could seem that it legitimately comes
from your bank, and could trick you into entering valid
credentials on a fake website.

Phishing is done through emails, instant messaging apps
or social media posts (on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn,
etc.).

11. Ransomware

Ransomware is a form of malware that essentially holds
a computer system captive while demanding a ransom.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 46

This type of malware locks you out of your computer by
either:

Lesson 3
encrypting files on the hard drive
or locking down the system and displaying messages
that extort you into paying the malware creator to remove
the restrictions and regain access to their computer, usu-
ally via a key. The bad news is that the malware creator is
the only one who knows the key.

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

Ransomware typically spreads like a normal computer
worm (by replicating itself in order to spread to other
computers), and it could infect your system via a down-
loaded file or through some other vulnerability in a net-
work service.

The chances of retrieving your data are very slim, unless
you’re willing to pay the ransom (which is why it’s crucial
to have a back-up of your data in a secure location).

The malware creator will either supply a program which
can decrypt the files, or he will send an unlock code that
decrypts your data. But there is no guarantee that this
will happen, even if you pay the requested ransom.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 47

12. Social engineering

Lesson 3 Social engineering is one of the most commonly used
methods of cyber hacking, which requires little to no
technology. It relies on psychological manipulation to
persuade the victims to perform certain actions or
divulge confidential information.

HOW YOU CAN BE COMPROMISED:

In this case, cyber criminals use lies, impersonation,
tricks, bribes, blackmail, and threats (just like your ex) to
attack information systems. Phishing (defined at #10) is
also a form of social engineering.

For example, cyber criminals may pose as contractors,
exterminators, fire marshals and technicians to go unno-
ticed as they steal your secrets or trick you into divulging
confidential information about your company.

13. Spam

We all know that spam is made of those pesky, unsolicit-
ed emails that clog our inboxes. But, in recent years,
spam has spread to instant messaging apps, texting,
blogs, forums, search engines, file sharing and social
media.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 48

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

Lesson 3 While spam itself may not seem very dangerous, it some-
times carries malware, spreads viruses, worms and other
types of threats, such as financial theft, identity theft,
data and intellectual property theft, fraud, and deceptive
marketing.

14. Trojan (Trojan horse)

A Trojan horse (commonly known as a Trojan) is a type of
malware that conceals itself as a normal file or program
to trick you into downloading and installing malware.

A Trojan can do many dangerous things to your system,
like give cyber criminals unauthorized, remote access to
your infected computer.

Once that happens, cyber criminals can:

steal data (logins, financial data, even electronic money),
install more malware, modify files,
monitor your activity (screen watching, keylogging, etc.),
use the computer in botnets (a collection of Internet-con-
nected programs communicating with other similar pro-
grams in order to spread malware),
encrypt your files, like in the case of ransomware (defined
at #11)

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 49

crash your computer
format your disks, destroying all the contents on your

Lesson 3 device, etc.

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

There are plenty of ways in which your system can
become compromised by a Trojan:
through email attachments
software or music downloads
unsafe instant messages
peer 2 peer downloads
routine forms that need to be filled in
drive-by downloads, etc.

15. URL or web content filtering

URL or web filtering technology is software which keeps
you from accessing inappropriate websites or content or
that prevents you from ending up in a dangerous web
location (and by dangerous I mean malware-laden).

The software’s filter checks the origin or content of a web
page against a set of rules provided by company or
person who has installed the URL filter. If the web page
has been blacklisted or marked as infected, it will deny
access to that web location, blocking a potential cyber
attack.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No more technical gibberish! Master basic security terms in 20 minutes 50

16. Virus (Computer Virus)

Lesson 3 A computer virus (shortly called virus) is a type of mal-
ware (told you it would come up often!) capable of replicat-
ing itself and spreading to other computers and data
files.

Viruses spread to other computers by attaching them-
selves to various programs and executing code when you
launch one of those infected programs.

But they’re really sneaky, so they can also spread through
script files, documents, and cross-site scripting vulnera-
bilities in web apps (defined at #17).

Viruses are also evil, because they can be used to steal
information, harm your computers, log keystrokes (key-
logging – defined at #6), create botnets, spam your con-
tacts, steal your money, display political or humorous
messages on your screen (the least of your worries), and
more.

(Nasty stuff, I know!)

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

Viruses install themselves without your consent, because

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 51

cyber criminals use social engineering (defined at #12)
and exploit software bugs and vulnerabilities (defined at

Lesson 3 #17) to gain access to your computing resources.

Viruses can reside in executable files (.exe or .com files),
in data files (Microsoft Word documents or PDFs), or in
the boot sector of your hard drive. Or in a combination of
all of these.
And the worst part is that some viruses are polymorphic,
which means that the virus has no parts which remain
identical between infections, making it very difficult to
detect directly with an antivirus solution.

17. Vulnerability

A cyber security vulnerability is a weakness which allows
an attacker to undermine your system's data security
defenses.

A vulnerability appears at the intersection of 3 elements:

1. a system susceptibility or flaw (example: your Java soft-
ware hasn’t been updated to the latest version – seems
pretty innocent, right?)

2. attacker access to the flaw (example: you click on a mal-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 52

ware-infected banner ad which delivers a download on
your computer)

Lesson 3
3. and attacker capability to exploit the flaw (example:  now

the cyber criminal has a way in, through that malicious
download).

A vulnerability is just a pretense that a cyber criminal can
use to launch a full scale attack on your system. He still
needs the right tools for that, but they come in a large
supply online and they’re cheap as well.

The way to protect yourself against vulnerabilities is to
maintain your software updated at all times, and there are
other tips & tricks I’ll share in the coming lessons as well.

18. Zero-Day virus

Now that you know what a vulnerability is, it’ll be really
easy to understand what a Zero-Day virus is as well.

Zero-Day viruses appear when cyber criminals discover a
flaw in a piece of software (for example, in Adobe Air).
They exploit that vulnerability, launching an attack that
users can’t defend themselves against, for two simple
reasons:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 53

The flaw they exploit is attacked by launching a previous-
ly unknown computer virus or other malware

Lesson 3
Antivi rus programs rely upon signatures to identify mal-
ware, but the signature for this new breed of malware or
virus is not in their database, because it’s new and hasn’t
been sampled.

That is why antivirus software is not effective against
Zero-Day viruses, and that why you need additional solu-
tions to protect you from advanced attacks such as
these.

HOW YOU CAN GET INFECTED:

The usual methods described beforehand work in this
case as well:
drive-by downloads
malvertising
spam
through email attachments
software or music downloads
unsafe instant messages
peer 2 peer downloads
routine forms that need to be filled in, etc.

The difference is that, once you get infected, there’s very

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Security 101: cover your basics in less than 1 hour 54

little you’ll be able to do to stop the infection and mitigate
its effects.

Lesson 3
But I promise that we will teach you how to strike back
against such attacks and keep safe online at all times!

Kudos for sticking with me until the end!

I know it’s a lot to take in at once, but remember you can
always keep this course and go back to it when you need
to.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 4  /19

Cyber criminals
can steal your
credentials in 2
minutes. Here’s
how to master
your password
security



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 56
             Here’s how to master your password security

Hey there,

Lesson 4 I’d like to start this lesson with one simple question I’d like you to
answer (to yourself) honestly:

Have you ever used the same password for more than one of your
accounts?

I know that, for most of us (if not for all of us), the answer is a shame-
ful… YES.

 I’ve done it too, because, if you think about it, we’ve never received a
proper education for using the Internet.

We wouldn’t let kids walk around without proper road safety education
and we wouldn’t let drivers hit the road without knowing the rules.

So why is it that we think that we can go online and put our entire lives
there (personal AND professional) without being aware of the dangers?

This lesson is a staple in your education about cyber security.

And the lead character is that string of characters that shield our most
prized information:

The mighty PASSWORD!

The problem is that the passwords we use are not that mighty. In fact,
we should just admit they’re actually LOUSY.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 57
             Here’s how to master your password security

Putting “12345678” between you and a sophisticated cyber criminal is
CRAZY, don’t you think?

Lesson 4
So it’s time you admit your sins and do something about them!

The 7 Deadly Sins of Password Management

1. You shall not keep your passwords in a text file, spread-
sheet, plain text or a similar, unprotected document!

Why? Because that flimsy file might get stolen, corrupted,
deleted or, worse, retrieved by cyber criminals. I wouldn’t
like to see you scramble to change 200 passwords as
soon as possible if you ever got hacked.

2. You shall not use the default password sent to you by a
service provider!

Why? It’s simple: because those passwords are usually
simple and, consequently, easily breakable. It would be
like giving candy to a baby, like they say. And cyber crimi-
nals love both your passwords and (probably) candy.

3. You shall not use one of the shamefully weak passwords
listed in this top 10!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 58
             Here’s how to master your password security

123456
123456789

Lesson 4 1234
Password
12345
12345678
Admin
123
111111
1234567

Why? I think the passwords above are self-explanatory,
don’t you?

4. You shall not use words that can be found in a dictionary
or that are common phrases!

Why? Because cyber criminals have a method called “dic-
tionary attack”.

A dictionary attack is based on trying all the strings in a
pre-arranged listing, typically derived from a list of words
such as in a dictionary (hence the name). And dictionary
attacks often succeed, exactly because many people use
short passwords that include ordinary words or simple
variants obtained, for example, by adding a digit or punc-
tuation character.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 59
             Here’s how to master your password security

5. You shall not use passwords that include your birth date
or other information that’s easily available online!

Lesson 4
Why? Because tracking down your personal information
online is what gives cyber criminals a field day. Even if
you have your privacy settings pushed to the max, there’s
always a way around them for a guy that hacks confiden-
tial information for a living.

6. You shall not use the same password without changing it
for a long period of time!

Why? Because passwords, just like the ice-cream in your
fridge, have an expiration date. An old password may be
easy to crack and there’s a lot that can go downhill from
there. Keeping things fresh can keep trouble off your
track.

7. You shall not use the same password twice! This is a big
one. Seriously!

Why? This is one of the CAPITAL mistakes we all make
when it comes to password management. Using the
same password for more than one account (and usually
making it an easy one) means that cyber criminals will
get access to MORE accounts at once, and they’ll be able

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 60
             Here’s how to master your password security

to steal MORE data and do MORE damage!

Lesson 4 Imagine if they cracked the password to your online bank-
ing account. And that password would be used for your
email account as well. Can you envision the impact of an
attack on your personal finances, and on your profession-
al and personal life?

If that thought made you shudder, let’s see what you can
do about it.

Here’s how cyber criminals try to break your passwords

This is a very quick run through the methods that cyber
criminals use to break your passwords and get access to
your private information:

Phishing – defined in lesson #3
Keylogging – defined in lesson #3
Social engineering – defined in lesson #3
Malware-based attacks – defined in lesson #3
Brute-force attacks – cyber criminals systematically
check all possible keys or passwords until they find the
right one. For this, they use algorithms that can try all of
these combinations superfast. Your short, repetitive
passwords are no match for them!
Database hacking – if a cyber criminal gains access to a
company’s user database that contains the credentials of

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 61
             Here’s how to master your password security

thousands or millions of customers, and you’re among
one of those customers, then you could be exposed as

Lesson 4 well. Tenths of attacks such as these have made the
headlines in the past 2 years, and they just seem to keep
on coming.

So now let’s get to THE FUN PART, where you get to do a
spring cleaning type of thing and change your passwords
while going through you accounts.

How to create a good password in 4 easy steps

Step 1. Use a password generator to create long, complex pass-
words.

You can use some of the options listed here or come up
with one yourself. Just make sure to follow step 2.

Recommended password generators:
https://www.random.org/passwords/
https://identitysafe.norton.com/password-generator/
http://strongpasswordgenerator.com/
http://freepasswordgenerator.com/

Step 2. Make sure to use a combination of words, numbers, sym-
bols, and both upper- and lower-case letters, without
using adjacent keyboard combinations (such as “qwerty”

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 62
             Here’s how to master your password security

or “12345678”).

Lesson 4 Example of a strong password:

Step 3. Set extra strong passwords for those accounts that are
crucial to you (email accounts, social media accounts,
online banking accounts, etc.) and make it memorable, so
you can use it anytime you’d like.

Don’t forget to apply step 2 when doing it. It’ll be good
exercise for your memory as well.

Step 4. Test your passwords’ strength using
howsecureismypassword.net.

This could give you an idea of how dreadfully unsafe your
old passwords were and give you a bit of comfort to know
that you’re doing the right thing by taking the time to
update your credentials.

Here is the result from having tested the password shown
as an example above:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 63
             Here’s how to master your password security

Lesson 4

So, you have your new, long and complex passwords. But
you have over 150, maybe even 200 accounts.

What now?
Well, now comes the part where you get learn…

How to safely store your passwords in 8 steps

Step 1. Use a password manager.

The reason behind this recommendation is: you’ll only
have to remember one strong password and all your other
passwords will be protected from keylogging and other

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 64
             Here’s how to master your password security

credential-sniffing tool that cyber criminals might use.

Lesson 4 Best free password management applications:
https://lastpass.com/
https://www.passwordbox.com/
https://identitysafe.norton.com/
https://www.wwpass.com/products/blackbook-pass-
word-manager/

Best paid password management applications:
https://www.dashlane.com/passwordmanager
https://lastpass.com/features_premium.php
https://www.stickypassword.com/free-vs-premium
http://www.roboform.com/why-everywhere
https://www.intuitivepassword.com/
https://keepersecurity.com/download.html
http://www.roboform.com/download

Step 2. If you want to go the extra mile, you can even consider
using more than one password manager application, thus
lowering the potential damage if one password-storing
service gets compromised (that’s a possibility too). Don’t
put all your eggs in one basket, as they say.

You might argue that these apps and services are prone
to vulnerabilities as well, and that’s very true, but it’s
much better than using the same password for every

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 65
             Here’s how to master your password security

service you use. Plus, password security is their busi-
ness, so rest assured that they know a thing or two about

Lesson 4 information security.

Step 3. Where it’s available, two-factor authentication is another
great safeguard against cyber attacks.

Using this option is especially important when it comes
to the critical accounts we talked about earlier.

How to turn on 2-step verification on Google:
https://support.google.com/accounts/an-
swer/180744?hl=en&ctx=ch_b%2F0%2FSmsAuthLanding

How to turn on Login Approvals on Facebook:
https://www.facebook.com/notes/facebook-engineer-
ing/introducing-login-approvals/10150172618258920

How to turn on two-step verification on Yahoo:
https://help.yahoo.com/kb/turn-two-step-verifica-
tion-sln5013.html

How to set up Logic Verification on Twitter:
https://blog.twitter.com/2013/getting-started-with-log-
in-verification

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 66
             Here’s how to master your password security

How to turn on two-step verification on Dropbox:
https://www.dropbox.com/en/help/363

Lesson 4
You can also use this list to verify is other services you
use offer 2-step verification: https://twofactorauth.org/.

Step 4. Be especially careful with the passwords you use for log-
ging into financial services, such as your online banking
account.

Try not to type these passwords, and try to use a
multi-layered protection system against cyber criminals
who are after your money (even if you don’t have millions
in the bank, trust me, they’re still after it).

Step 5. Make sure that, when you log into an especially important
account, the website has added protection through
HTTPS.

HTTPS is communications protocol for secure communi-
cation over a computer network. Its value comes from
the fact that it provides bidirectional encryption of com-
munications between a user and server, which protects
you against cyber criminal attacks such as eavesdrop-
ping.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 67
             Here’s how to master your password security

Lesson 4

If a website you’re visiting does not have HTTPS enabled,
you’d better double check its safety and see if you’re sure
you want to enter your credentials there. Additionally, you
might not want to store your credit card details in that
account either.

Step 6. Keep your browser and vulnerable software updated.

Every time you don’t have time to perform an update for
one of your browsers or on a software such as Java,
Adobe Reader or Adobe Flash, a cyber criminal is taking
advantage of a flaw left uncorrected (ad potentially un-
leashing a Zero Day virus on you).

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 68
             Here’s how to master your password security

Updates are not only used to deliver better functionality,
but security patches as well!

Lesson 4

Step  7. Change your passwords frequently.

Even if you’ve set strong passwords, keeping things fresh
always helps.

By putting together this routine and applying it constant-
ly, you’ll discover a new way of keeping safe online, which
will give you peace of mind and a sense of comfort.

Step  8. Don’t compromise yourself.

Sometimes, human error is the biggest liability in our
data’s security, so try to keep paying attention to how you
share passwords.

When you’re either delegating work, go for a vacation or a
sick leave, give access to business partners, or even
when a colleague asks you for a passwords, chose the
safe way to do it.

You can share passwords safely through a password

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 69
             Here’s how to master your password security

management service and some apps even define levels
of access (which are pretty common nowadays), so take

Lesson 4 full advantage of those options.

And also be aware of the people around you. Someone
might just look over your shoulder and check out your
password. Be mindful of your surroundings, both when
you’re online and offline.

Can’t anyone figure out something better than passwords?

They haven’t yet. So passwords will be around for a while,
that’s for sure. Until we’ll start using biometric technolo-
gy or a groundbreaking innovation comes into play, we
will still rely on this method of authentication. So we’d
better do it right!

To end things on a funny, but educative note, here’s
Edward Snowden talking about password security with
John Oliver. It’s a 3 minute video that could, perhaps, talk
you into making some changes, if I haven’t managed to
persuade you until this point.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber criminals can steal your credentials in 2 minutes. 70
             Here’s how to master your password security

Lesson 4

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yzGzB-yYKcc

Stay safe!

PS: There are even some free tools you can use to check
and see if your passwords for different accounts have
been compromised or not:
https://breachalarm.com/
https://pwnedlist.com/query
https://haveibeenpwned.com/

Use them wisely!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 5  /19

How do I
choose the best
antivirus: We
have just the
thing for you



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 72

In the previous lesson, we provided some useful insights and solutions
on how you can create a password and how important it is to have a

Lesson 5 strong one for your online accounts.

Now, it’s time for us to approach one of the most important lessons of
our course and finally answer a vital question:

How can you choose the best antivirus software?

I know there are many antivirus solutions on the market and you prob-
ably have difficulties in picking the right product for your system.

And I really understand this. Though I’ve been working for some time
in the IT industry, when I see so many security products, even I am a
bit puzzled on what I should select.

So what is the best antivirus for my computer?

Since we’re dealing with so much confusing information, I believe it’s a
good idea to organize the main sources of data, before I explain each
area of interest and how it is useful for your antivirus research.

Here are 3 sources where you can find the information you need:
User opinions
Expert reviews
Independent testing

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 73

Lesson 5

User opinions

First of all, you are not the first who asked this question.
And for sure, you won’t be the last. For this reason, one of
the easiest ways to find the best antivirus program is to

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 74

check what other users have to say in security forums
reviews and topics from various websites.

Lesson 5
Important!
Before I proceed, I must underline that a user’s opinion
should be taken into account only after analyzing the
posting history and only after checking there’s no obvi-
ous bias for a security product.

Security forums

Some of the best places to find user opinions and prod-
uct reviews on security solutions and antivirus software
on the market are the good old security forums in the IT
industry.

For example, the links below will send you to some of the
best security forums in the online, where you can find a
great number of user reviews and good (or bad) experi-
ences users encountered with security products:

The Community Video Reviews – a forum which contains
video reviews and tests antivirus products
Windows Secrets – Security & Scams
Wilders Security Forums – Security Products
CyberPower Forum – Anti-virus
Bleeping Computer – Anti-Virus and Anti-Malware Soft-
ware

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 75

Quora

Lesson 5 This website is based on questions and answers that
become useful to the community of users. You can ask a
question and receive answers or you can find answers to
questions that have already been asked.

The website is designed so that you may be able to find
quickly your areas of interest. To go fast to the security
areas, insert in the Search bar the following: Computer
Security, Anti-Virus Software or Internet Security will
take you to the designated topics:

Computer Security
Anti-Virus Software
Internet Security

As you can see, these topics are followed by thousands
of people, so it should not be too difficult to find what
you’re looking for.

Yahoo Answers

This website is another place where you can share your
knowledge on a variety of topics. It is at the same time a
good place to find questions and answers for Internet
and computer related security subjects.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 76

That’s why I recommend posing your security questions
here, like “What’s the Best Antivirus?”

Lesson 5
For specific areas on Internet security, check these cate-
gories:

Software
Internet
Security

Trustpilot

You read the available user reviews and the experiences
others encountered after purchasing a certain antivirus.
In this process, you probably changed your mind a few
times.

But now that you have decided on the best product,
maybe it’s time to see what others have to say about the
site they used to purchase the product.

For this, you can simply access the Trustpilot site and
insert the website you want to use for your purchase in
the required field. The search results will indicate the
good or bad experiences people had with that website
and it will give you a better perspective on this whole
process.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 77

Expert Reviews
Lesson 5 PC Magazine

PC Magazine is not just a testing agency, it is a complete
guide to computers, a place where you find computer and
Internet related products and services.

To check what security solution you should choose,
access their website and use one of the following op-
tions:

Take a look at the top right corner and insert in the
search field Best Antivirus. (It should already be placed
there for you).

This is the easiest way to reach Neil Rubenking’s article,
Top Antivirus 2016, where you can find 5 antivirus prod-
ucts selected as the best for 2015.

Here are some criteria you can use to choose the right AV
product for you:

In the Reviews section, you have a few options to select
the price you want to pay, the company you prefer or the
category you need. The Category is useful if you look for
something different, like a Parental Control product or an
antispam tool.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 78

Here again, the easiest way is to go to Best Antivirus
Software tab in order to access the same article by Neil

Lesson 5 Rubenking, The Best Antivirus Utilities for 2016.
If you take a quick look at the article, you notice the 5
security products are Webroot SecureAnywhere AntiVi-
rus (2015), Bitdefender Antivirus Plus 2016, McAfee Anti-
Virus Plus 2016, Kaspersky Anti-Virus (2016) and Trend
Micro Antivirus+ Security 2016. For each of them, you
can see there is a review available.

If you access the review for the products, you will notice
the available price, and a few final conclusions (Pros,
Cons and Bottom Line) in case you don’t have time to
read the article.

If you continue to scroll down, you can check the main
security features that were put to the test:

malware blocking
malicious URL blocking
phishing detection
privacy protection
additional features

So, let’s summarize this:

1. You have found the 5 best antivirus products.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 79

2. You read the reviews. I know, it takes time, but it is an
important decision.

Lesson 5 3. You compare the products. Maybe your first selection
criterion is the price. Or it is malware blocking capabili-
ties.

4. You order to product and keep your system safe.

If you are in doubt about a certain product, you can see
that most security products nowadays come with a trial
testing mode, where you can use it for a month or so, and
then make up your mind.

We recommend using the trial period for any product,
because some of them may protect you very well, but
they may affect your system’s performance. And this is
something you learn after a few weeks.

It’s no problem if you test more than one security prod-
uct, simply remember to keep only one of them on the
system in any given period. Having more than one securi-
ty product on the system leads to conflicts, slowdowns or
even system crashes, since they use the same system
resources.

Before you install another product, make sure you have
removed completely the previous software using the un-
install tool provided by the company. Choose wisely.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 80

Gizmo’s Freeware – Best Free Antivirus Software

Lesson 5 This website is highly recommended for its security eval-
uation of free antivirus products. Though I recommend
using a paid antivirus product, I need to mention there are
out there very good free products that might just cover
your security needs. Therefore, use the link above and
check the presented solutions for a time, before you
decide to go with a paid antivirus product.

Tom’s Guide – Best Antivirus Software and Apps 2015

Another important security website to check if you are
interested in online protection. The link above will send
you to another antivirus evaluation, where only the best
products have been taken into account. At the same time,
you can also take a look at the free antivirus products
tested.

Softpedia – Antivirus

Softpedia comes with a high number of security solu-
tions, from very well established solutions to others,
which are less known by the large public. Nevertheless, I
think you should give them a chance and take a look at
them. Maybe this is where you’ll find your security solu-
tion.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 81

PC Advisor – Test Centre

Lesson 5 The test centre from PC Advisor puts to the test about 21
antivirus products in the market for the UK public. That
doesn’t mean you can’t check them out for yourself and
decide if one of them is good for you too.

Independent testing

We have reached the major certification and testing
agencies, and it is important to see what they have to say
about what is the best antivirus you can choose. After all,
they are in business for some years and they can’t afford
to lose credibility, so checking these places should give
you a pretty good idea on what to select.

Important!
We need to make sure the antivirus tests are as objective
as possible and respect some fundamental principles of
testing. For this reason, I invite you to take a look at this
important paper from Anti-Malware Testing Standards
Organization: AMTSO Fundamental Principles of Testing.

To simplify things, we will demonstrate briefly how you
can find the best antivirus for your Windows operating
system.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 82

AV-Test

Lesson 5 This testing agency is an independent service provider in
IT security that analyzes the latest malware, using the
best security solutions available and informs the public
on the top-quality results.

To check what security solution you should choose,
access their website and follow these steps:

1. Right in front of you, there should be Test results accord-
ing to area of application.

Access Home User Windows.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 83

2. In the new window, select your Windows operating
system and from the left column, choose the latest test

Lesson 5 results period. Then take a look at the security products
displayed.

As you can see in the list, there are a great number of
products.

If we take a look at the top of the list, you notice there are
3 main criteria:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 84

Protection
Performance

Lesson 5 Usability

For each criterion, there are 6 maximum points a product
can obtain.

3. Let’s choose for our example, Bitdefender Internet Security
2015.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 85

4. In the list, the following criteria appear:

Lesson 5 Protection – Protection against malware infections,
which include 0-day malware attacks, including web and
email threats

Performance – Average influence of the product on com-
puter speed in daily usage

Usability – Impact of the security software on the usabili-
ty of the whole computer

To have an idea on each data, you can take a look at the
right where the Industry average appears.

If you are not sure about a certain product, you can
select from the top menu Tests> Compare manufacturer
results.

This way, you can compare the rest results of several
antivirus products and choose the best for your operating
system.

AV Comparatives

AV Comparatives is an Austrian based testing agency
that assesses popular antivirus solutions and releases

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 86

accurate reports and charts. To check what security solu-
tion you should choose, access their website and use one

Lesson 5 of the following options:

You can notice in the top menu a few tests that were run
on the antivirus products:

Real-World Protection Tests
File Detection Tests
Heuristic/Behaviour Tests
False Alarm Tests
Performance Tests
Malware Removal Tests
Anti-Phishing Tests

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 87

Though I recommend taking a look at all the available
tests, I think that starting with the Whole Product Dynam-

Lesson 5 ic “Real-World” Protection and Performance tests, is a
good place to start. These 2 tests will give you most cer-
tainly a good idea on what the best security product is for
your system.

Real-World Protection Test

This is probably the most important test you need to take
into consideration, because it indicates the Protection
Rate achieved by a certain product.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 88

To quote the guys who run this test: “all protection fea-
tures of the product can be used to prevent infection –

Lesson 5 not just signatures or heuristic file scanning.”

Therefore, consider the test and then take a look at page
9 to check the results and compare the products that
were put to the test. Look at those products that got over
99% in protection rate score.

Performance Test

This test gives an indication on the system performance
while using a certain Internet security product. Neverthe-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 89

less, users are encouraged to test a product on their own
system.

Lesson 5
To give you a clue on the system performance, the test
run the following activities:

file copying
archiving/ unarchiving
encoding
installing/ uninstalling apps
launching apps
downloading

And the most important element was that PC Mark 8
Professional Testing Suite was also used to provide an
industry recognized performance test.

Though I recommend going through the entire test, a
simple look at pages 9 and 10 will give you an idea on
what security products are in the “green” zone.

For example, the overview of performance scores from
page 9 will shed some light on each product performance
in file copying, archiving, installing, encoding, launching
apps and downloading operations. Scroll down to page
10 and you can see the PC Mark 8 points achieved by
each software.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 90

If you are still not convinced on a product’s abilities to
keep you safe from malware, I recommend running an-

Lesson 5 other 2 additional tests: File Detection Test and Heuris-
tic/ Behaviour test.

File Detection Test

It is an important element you need to consider before
purchasing an antivirus product.

As in the other tests, the default settings were used and

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 91

the on-access scanning is taken into consideration. At
the same time, an additional False Positives test has

Lesson 5 been run, which is something you should consider in your
final conclusion.

Again, though I recommend reading the entire test, if you
take a quick look at page 7, you will notice the detection
rates’ results. Here you can take into consideration the
software that obtained at least a 99% score. Just to be on
the safe side, scroll down to page 8 and see how the
number of FPs and of course that the fewer they are, the
better.

Heuristic/Behaviour (or Retrospective/Proactive)

This test is run by AV Comparatives once a year and
includes behavioral routines, which evaluate the proac-
tive protection capabilities of the products.

The main idea behind this test is to evaluate how antivi-
rus products are able to detect new malware threats
using heuristic techniques or behavioral protection mea-
sures.

Since new malware appears every day and there is
always a time frame in which you are not protected, that
is until the malware signature is sent to your antivirus

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 92

Lesson 5

product, this heuristic technology becomes the last line
of defense against malware, and therefore it is not some-
thing you should ignore.

If you don’t have the time to go through the entire test,
take a look at page 5 and again look for the products in
the “green” area, which means these software solutions
are capable to keep the system safe from new malware
threats.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 93

Anti-Phishing Test

Lesson 5

This test evaluates the protection against phishing
attempts, which usually occur by email or instant mes-
saging, and lure the target into entering sensitive details
on fake websites that look similar to the legitimate ones.

As in the previous tests, you can go directly to page 4 and
see an overview of the percentages of blocked phishing
websites, for each product tested. It is obvious in this
case again that the first 3 places are to be considered.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 94

For more information on a security product, you can con-
tinue to analyze the other test results in order to make

Lesson 5 sure you found a good product.

Virus Bulletin

Virus Bulletin is one of the most reliable testing facilities
and it frequently features analyses of a great number of
anti-virus products, offering an objective point of view for
any user that needs the best antivirus product.

Though the website may seem a bit intimidating at first,
with that technical feeling all over, you can reach quite
easily the comparative tests.

As you enter the website, you need to access VB100 in
the top menu and select “latest comparative” from the
drop-down menu.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 95

If you scroll down and click “full Windows 7 report“, you
can read the entire document, which contains many se-

Lesson 5 curity details, like detection score, False Positives, stabili-
ty rating, performance measures and the RAP (Reactive
and Proactive) tests.

To make things easier for you, you can go in the same
drop down menu and choose “recent test summary” or
“compare vendors” to have a better picture on how each
product scored in the test.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 96

This way you can easily compare favorite products by
looking at how they behave on Detection, Performance or

Lesson 5 even Proactive scanning technology.

Dennis Technology Labs

This testing company is one of the most renowned inde-
pendent evaluation facilities in the IT industry analyzing
both consumer and business solutions.

To access the latest security report, access this location
and open the latest available test from the Home Anti-Vi-
rus Protection, which is at the bottom of the page.

If you don’t want to go through all the report’s data, the
first page gives an Executive Summary, which offers an
idea on the products tested and their scores. Again, the
reliable products will appear in the “green” area.

In the second page, you can see the conclusion of the
report: “Which was the best product?“

You already know this by now:

Your choice of cyber security software can make or break
your data protection!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  How do I choose the best antivirus: We have just the thing for you 97

Antivirus is essential to have, but it’s not enough, as you’ll
find out from the next lesson.

Lesson 5
So how can you protect your system from advanced threats
if AV can’t do it?

The answer is simple: by using a cyber threat security
suite that is focused on proactive protection. You’ll find
out more about why next-generation anti-hacking tools
are important and why antivirus can no longer cope with
current threats in the next lesson.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 6  /19

Next-gen
anti-hacking
tools are here
to protect you
(because
antivirus is not
enough)



CSB  -  Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect you 99
             (because antivirus is not enough)

Our last guide provided useful instructions on how you can choose the
best antivirus product for your system.

Lesson 6
Now, a new question pops up:

Can a traditional antivirus product protect you from advanced malware
attacks launched by cyber-criminal minds?

And since this is an important question, I think you need a straight
answer, so here it is:

Though I believe a very good antivirus product can still cover most of
your system’s security, the present threats and cyber criminal attacks
have the ability to overcome your antivirus’s detection system.

For this reason, you simply need to employ additional weapons in the
fight against advanced pieces of malicious code delivered by hackers.

How do cyber criminals evade traditional detection?

I don’t want to emphasize the idea that traditional antivi-
rus is dead, but only point out to a few simple techniques
that are used by anyone who creates a malicious piece of
code:

they install the best antivirus products and see if they

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect you 100
             (because antivirus is not enough)

detect the piece of code as being malicious

Lesson 6 they just upload the piece of code on Virus Total and see
if any antivirus product in the list detects it

they use a packer or obfuscation capabilities, which due
to their polymorphic abilities evade normal antivirus de-
tection

antivirus vendors are slow in updating the malware sig-
natures

So, how do you stay safe from most online threats, if not all?

10 Steps to Bulletproof Your Digital Security

1. Use a reliable antivirus product

I know, it sounds funny, but traditional antivirus products
are not dead yet. Or just not yet. You still need a good
antivirus to catch most malware, block phishing threats
and check web reputation of popular online domains.

Though it is not an easy task to find the best antivirus
product from the market, it is still a very useful tool to
block most malware threats.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect you 101
             (because antivirus is not enough)

We’ve covered the how tos of choosing an AV in lesson 5,
so feel free to go back to it as often as you need to.

Lesson 6
2. Stick with your old firewall solution

Though the firewall has been placed lately on that list of
ineffective security tools that we can forget about, there
are still voices that consider the time when we still need
firewalls is not yet over.

Though I admit there are limitations to its blocking capa-
bilities, the firewall is still a good tool that you can use to
filter your Internet traffic, block communication from an
infected machine or online location.

In this case, there is quite a similarity between the antivi-
rus and the firewall. They both cover some areas of Inter-
net security, but just not all of them.


3. Use anti-spyware solutions to protect your system

As you already know, spyware is software that monitors
your Internet traffic and uses your personal information
against you.

In cases where multiple issues appear, like system
slow-down, pop-ups when you navigate, new toolbars and

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect you 102
             (because antivirus is not enough)

random error messages, all these indicate a possible spy-
ware infection.

Lesson 6
To stay safe from spyware, you can use a few popular
anti-spyware products, like Malwarebytes or Spybot
Search and Destroy.

Or, to prevent this type of infection, follow a few steps:

don’t click suspicious links in emails from unknown
people
don’t click unexpected pop-ups, even from legitimate
websites
don’t disclose personal information to strangers on social
media platforms
pay attention to drive-by downloads that could bring spy-
ware on your system

4. Use automatic update tools for your vulnerable applica-
tions

Are you using Adobe Flash, Reader or Java on your operating
system?

Are you using at least one popular web browser like Google
Chrome or Mozilla Firefox?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect you 103
             (because antivirus is not enough)

99% of users will say YES.

Lesson 6 "What does that mean for me?", you may ask.

By using security holes in unpatched applications, cyber
criminals manage to spread exploits that deliver financial
and data stealing malware on the affected systems.

For this reason, you always need to have the latest securi-
ty patches available and this can only be done by using a
free solution that does this automatically for you.


5. Use a password manager for your credentials

It is easy to subscribe to a great number of online ac-
counts and forget what passwords you have set. To avoid
this issue, most people simply choose using only one or
two passwords all the time.

But, this is exactly what hackers count on!

That’s because not all these online accounts incorporate
high security standards to protect our password. And if
they break just one account and find out your password,
they can simply use it on all the other online locations.

Remember lesson 4? I hope you’ve already applied the

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect you 104
             (because antivirus is not enough)

steps there, so that you can check this off and move on
to the next thing!

Lesson 6
6. Back-up your system and sensitive information

If you ask security experts their best advice on how to
keep sensitive information secure from cyber-criminals,
most of them will tell you that a back-up solution is the
best option you have.

So, even if your system is blocked by ransomware that
stops you from accessing it, you can format the system
and use your backup to be back on track.

You can use one of the available back-up solutions avail-
able or you can keep most important data in the cloud
and access it from any location and any device.

Back-up solutions coming your way in lesson 8!

7. Maximize your data and financial protection

These security products are designed to detect online
threats that normal antivirus products can’t remove, like
Zero Day attacks that a traditional signature based antivi-
rus is not able to block from infecting your system.
Most of the time, these solutions target financial infor-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect you 105
             (because antivirus is not enough)

mation from the system, like credit card and pin numbers
or personal data that we employ on online banking ac-

Lesson 6 counts.

In order to get protection against data stealing malware,
the solution you need should:

include a real-time Internet traffic scanner that scans all
incoming network data for potential malware threats
provide malware detection and removal of malicious code
from a system
contain online scanning capabilities that detect mali-
cious software from online pages and legitimate websites

To assure financial security for banking operations and
protection against zero day malware, you need an ad-
vanced scanning technology that can protect you from
the latest threats.


8. Encrypt your important files

By encrypting your personal information you make sure
cybercriminals can’t access your confidential data, even
if they gain access to your operating system.

You can choose to encrypt files on your local disk or you
can choose an online location, which makes things more

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect you 106
             (because antivirus is not enough)

difficult for any hacker.

Lesson 6 Since this is a long topic, I recommend that you think
about encryption as an important part of your online se-
curity strategy.

For example, you can use an encryption program for your
files, but how useful can it be if your password for the pro-
gram is not that strong?

Think about encryption as an important part of your
online security strategy. And check your inbox for lesson
8 a little down the road for a list of tools you can use.

9. Protect your online traffic by using multiple tools

How do you keep your system safe from online threats?

It is the same question I started this article with, but are
we closer to the answer?

To improve your online protection, you cannot rely on a
single solution, but you rather need to understand that
multiple means and guidelines need to be followed:

let’s start with the browser. Are you using the latest version
that contains all the available security patches?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect you 107
             (because antivirus is not enough)

did you know that you can improve your good old browser?
how much are you travelling and need to use public net-

Lesson 6 works and computers? In case you do, don’t forget to use a
private browsing session to go online or at least use a
free proxy server to hide your IP address from surveil-
lance mechanisms.
are you serious about online security and privacy? Then you
need to best tools available out there. To encrypt your
online connection, use a VPN solution. Choose the Tor
browser to hide your Internet activity by sending your
communication through the Tor network of computers.

Get your browser protection right in lesson 10. You’re only
4 lessons away!


10. Listen and learn from the best

Though you may rely on one or more security solutions to
do the job for you, a set of safety guidelines should be
followed. In lesson 19, a little further down the road, we’ll
share some stuff you’re probably never thought of (and
that you REALLY NEED).

That’s why learning from the experience and the best in
the IT industry is an important step in improving your
online safety.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Next-gen anti-hacking tools are here to protect you 108
             (because antivirus is not enough)

If we break it down, it doesn’t mean that antivirus is dead
and we should all just give up antivirus products, but

Lesson 6 rather adopt new tools to protect against phishing
attempts, spam campaigns, malicious web pages and
cybercriminal attacks.

Though you may consider for the moment that you have
enough protection, future events may change your opin-
ion. When that happens, you know you can always return
to this guide and choose the best security solutions for
your system.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 7  /19

Do you know
about these
security holes
in your system?



CSB  -  Do you know about these security holes in your system? 110

Hi there,

Lesson 7 In the past two lessons, you’ve learnt about choosing the right antivi-
rus for your computer and enhancing your security with next-genera-
tion anti-hacking tools.

But to understand how they work to protect you and why it’s necessary
to protect yourself from your own actions, we need to answer an
essential question:

What are the dangers that threaten your data’s security?

If you’re like me, you surely have a bunch of gadgets you use constant-
ly. And they’re probably connected to the Internet as well (because,
let’s be frank, they’re pretty useless without it).

How many of the devices in this list do you own?
1. Computer (laptop/desktop)
2. Smartphone
3. Tablet
4. TV
5. Kindle
6. Photo camera
7. Printer/scanner
8. MP3 player
9. Gaming console

10. GPS
11. DVD player
12. Sports bracelet
13. Headphones.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Do you know about these security holes in your system? 111

Naturally, the list could do on and on, but the key takeaway here is that
at least 7 or 8 of this list of gadgets can be Internet-connected, and,

Lesson 7 consequently, hackable.

Back in 2014 (that seems like a while ago, doesn’t it?),
the UK had more Internet-connected gadgets than
PEOPLE!

According to the numbers, the average British household
owns 7.4 internet devices used to browse the web
(source).

Just imagine how the numbers have grown since then!

So let’s get down to the nuts & bolts:

Say you have a computer, a smartphone, a tablet and a
TV that are connected to the Internet through your
home’s Wi-fi connection.

They will be vulnerable in a number of ways against cyber
criminals and their intentions:

Your home Wi-fi network can be easily hacked if you
don’t take the necessary precautions (a dedicated guide
is coming in lesson #12).

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Do you know about these security holes in your system? 112

Your computer can be compromised in a number of ways,
both through software (malware, viruses, Trojans, etc.)

Lesson 7 and through hardware (infected USBs, for example).
Your smartphone could fall prey to malvertising when
browsing the web via a public Wi-fi hotspot without ade-
quate protection.
Your tablet can be compromised through malware by
installing a rogue app or by visiting an infected website.
Even smart TVs are vulnerable to hacking attempts,
although they’re not as susceptible as other gadgets. But
they may be invading your privacy, by collecting your
browsing data and other confidential information gath-
ered through their voice recognition technology.

All these vulnerabilities (and many, many more) come
from a variety of sources, and cyber criminals ace at
exploiting them.

These vulnerabilities need to be managed and mitigated,
so you can become aware of them and get adequate pro-
tection to the extent of your resources.

But what is a vulnerability?

A cyber security vulnerability is a weakness which allows
an attacker to undermine a system's data security de-
fenses. It’s the Achilles heel of your computer.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Do you know about these security holes in your system? 113

A vulnerability appears at the intersection of 3 elements:

Lesson 7 1. a system susceptibility or flaw (example: your Java soft-
ware hasn’t been updated to the latest version – seems
pretty innocent, right?)

2. attacker access to the flaw (example: you click on a mal-
ware-infected banner ad which delivers a download on
your computer)

3. and attacker capability to exploit the flaw (example:  now
the cyber criminal has a way in, through that malicious
download).

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Do you know about these security holes in your system? 114

Between 60% and 90% of cyber attacks are caused by a
security hole in the software you use, which makes it the

Lesson 7 most used attack vector hackers employ.

So what should you watch out for?

Here is the most vulnerable 3rd party software on the
market:

1. Oracle Java Runtime environment
2. Adobe Acrobat Reader
3. Adobe Flash Player / Plugin
4. Apple Quicktime

Of these 4, the Oracle Java Runtime Environment ac-
counts for 180 registered vulnerabilities alone in 2013.
That comes to 15 vulnerabilities PER MONTH! The next
piece of software on the list is Acrobat Reader with 66
vulnerabilities or 5.5/month, still quite high, but not as
extreme.

The bad news is that you’re probably using at least 3 of
these types of software right now!

The good news is that you can do something about it!

Here’s how you can manage your vulnerabilities:
Never ignore an update prompt again! Make sure you

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Do you know about these security holes in your system? 115

install updates as soon as they’re available or use an au-
tomatic patching software that delivers updates silently

Lesson 7 and without interrupting your work. Heimdal Free is such
an option that you can install in under 2 minutes and
which won’t impact your computer’s performance.

If you don’t use it constantly, uninstall it. Software on
your computer that you rarely use most likely hasn’t been
updated in a long while, so it can become a security risk.
Protect yourself and uninstall it.

Don’t feed your computer junk. The key to keeping your
computer safe and performing well is not to install bad
software. Unless it comes from a well-known software
maker you trust, you shouldn’t be installing it. The same
goes for browser add-ons.

Use a good antivirus. Although it doesn’t offer complete
protection, antivirus is essential for your system’s securi-
ty. Run an in depth scan once in a while – it will do noth-
ing but good!

Use next-generation anti-hacking tools. Your antivirus is
a reactive solution, but you need a proactive one as well.
Try to find a strong tool you can invest in that has traf-
fic-scanning and strong anti-malware capabilities. This
works proactively and strengthens your defenses sub-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Do you know about these security holes in your system? 116

stantially.

Lesson 7 Keep an eye out for trouble. Make sure to monitor any
suspicious behavior on your computer. In lesson #16
you’ll learn all about detecting cyber attacks and mitigat-
ing their consequences, so stay tuned.

Vulnerability management is not a practice reserved to
companies, but it’s also something that should become
part of our routine as Internet users.

It’s sort of cyber hygiene, if you’d like, one that it extreme-
ly necessary!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 8  /19

Stop
procrastinating!
Read this & Get
your data to
safety



CSB  -  Stop procrastinating! Read this & Get your data to safety 118

In the last lesson, we talked about how to manage the vulnerabilities in
your system, so by now you’re probably worried about the data on your

Lesson 8 laptop, just like me.

And, just as I used to do, you probably keep putting off that backup
you’ve been meaning to do for a while.

So for people like you and I, who can’t really spare that much time
when it comes to backing up their data, I put together this simple,
actionable guide to stop procrastinating and get it over with.

But if you’re more the “it can’t happen to me” type of person, just take
a peek below, which shows general failure rates for computer hard
drives just like yours:

Source

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Stop procrastinating! Read this & Get your data to safety 119

„But who would be interested in my data?”, you may ask yourself.

Lesson 8 Cyber criminals for starters. And they have the tools and knowledge to
crack your passwords (which are probably too simple and weak, as
discussed in lesson #4) in just a few minutes.

Real life criminals who might steal your laptop, tablet or smartphone.
Maybe they won’t be interested in the data inside more than in the
gadget itself, but can you really count on that?

And then there are problems such as: losing your laptop/tablet/smart-
phone or damaging it in some way. You could become your own prob-
lem.

Source

„But backups are complicated and I don’t have the skills for that!”, you
might argue.

That’s a myth (and an excuse you use to justify not backing up your
data). Because I know there’s a lot of information out there, I created
this guide to makes things simple and actionable.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Stop procrastinating! Read this & Get your data to safety 120

“I’m sure there must be some software that can recover my data, even if it
gets deleted accidentally”, you may hope.

Lesson 8
I hate to break this to you, but NO, there isn’t. There is no magic wand
and no undo button for this one.

If your computer’s hard drive fails, it’s ALL GONE.

Could you bear losing everything on your computer: family photos, vaca-
tion videos, work projects, financial documents, passwords, music, etc.?

I thought so. There’s only one thing left to do:

Read the steps below and apply them ASAP!

How to backup your computer: the best advice in one
place

Backups are necessary copies of your data that you store
somewhere safe to restore in case anything happens to
the device you’re working on.

For now we’re going to focus on creating a backup for
Windows users, but you can find a backup solution no
matter what device or OS you’re using. Moreover, you can
also use some of the principles listed in this course to get
started.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Stop procrastinating! Read this & Get your data to safety 121

Here are 2 important factors you need to think about
before starting your backup:

Lesson 8
How much storage space do you need?

Do you want to backup all your files or just a selection
containing the most important ones?

The 5 golden rules of data backup

1. Keep at least 3 copies of your data.

2. Keep backups on different types of support.

3. Maintain a constant, automated backup schedule.

4. Keep your data backups in a secure, off-site location.

5. Secure your backups with strong passwords and keep
those passwords safe (check the password security
guide for more details).

The rules above are simple, so now I want to help you find
the right tools to get it done. So I have one question for
you:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Stop procrastinating! Read this & Get your data to safety 122

What do you want to spend on your data’s safe storage:
TIME or MONEY?

Lesson 8
Spending TIME
If all you want to invest is time, you can choose one of
these free cloud storage services:
Google Drive – 15 GB free
Symform – 10 GB
Bitcasa – 5 GB
OneDrive – 5 GB free
iDrive – 5 GB
Dropbox – 2 GB (you can win up to 16 GB of free space
through referrals)
SpiderOak – 2 GB
Google Photos - unlimited, high-quality photos and
videos.

If the stuff you want to backup fit in the free space
offered by one of these services, all you have to do is
couple it with a free backup software and you’re done!
And we have just the list for you: 34 Free Backup Soft-
ware Tools.

Spending MONEY
If your backup needs exceed these free options, you
should keep in mind that online backup software and
storage is not expensive!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Stop procrastinating! Read this & Get your data to safety 123

Let me give you some examples:

Lesson 8 Cloud storage (pricing per month):
Google Drive – $1.99 for 100 GB or $9.99 for 1 TB (check
out the rest of the options)
OneDrive – $1.99 for 100 GB or $6.99 for 1 TB, including
Office 365 (check out the rest of the options)
Dropbox – $9.99 for 1 TB or $15 / user / month for unlim-
ited(!) storage (details)
SugarSync – $7.49 for 100 GB or $9.99 for 200 GB (check
out the rest of the options)
Symform – $10 for 100 GB or $20 for 200 GB (check out
the rest of the options)
Bitcasa – $10 for 1 TB or $99 for 10 TB (details)
SpiderOak – $12 for 1 TB (details).
Amazon Cloud Drive – $11.99/year for storing unlimited
photos or $60/year for unlimited everything (details).

Online backup services (pricing per year):
iDrive – $45 (details)
BackBlaze – $50 (details)
CrashPlan – $60 (details)
Carbonite: $60 (details)
Acronis: $100 (details)
O&O Disk Image 9: $50 (details)
Rebit 6: $40 – one time payment (details).

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Stop procrastinating! Read this & Get your data to safety 124

You can also this great comparison tool to evaluate fea-
tures and pricing for multiple software options. Check out

Lesson 8 the homepage on BestBackups.com as well for backup
tools for other operating systems and focused on specif-
ic criteria.

Because you should follow backup rule nr. 2 – keep back-
ups on different types of support – let’s check some ex-
ternal drives options as well:
HGST Touro S 1TB – $70 (details)
HGST Touro Mobile 1TB – $55 (details)
Seagate Expansion 1TB Portable – $65 (details)
Seagate Backup Plus Slim 1TB – $65 (details)
Seagate Expansion 1TB – $60 (details)
Toshiba 1TB Canvio Basics – $58 (details).

All that you have to do now is:
1. Make a choice of a free or paid storage
2. Pick a backup software solution
3. Choose the files you want to back up
4. Set a constant backup schedule
5. Sit back and know that your data is safe.

That wasn’t as difficult as you imagined, now was it?

Now that you’ve put your data to safety, let’s see why you
need data encryption (even if you’re not a security spe-
cialist). Coming up in lesson #9!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 9  /19

You need data
encryption
(even if you’re
not a security
specialist)



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 126

Our last guides provided useful instructions on how you can select the
best security products and what backup solutions you can use for the

Lesson 9 protection of your system files.

You can’t really build a decent security strategy without using a few
reliable encryption mechanisms that are able to secure our essential
data from online threats and privacy breaches.

But what exactly is data encryption?

Encryption is a process that transforms accessible data or information
into an unintelligible code that cannot be read or understood by normal
means.

The purpose of encryption is to secure sensitive information from
cyber-criminals or other online dangers. At the same time, it is a
method that can be used to archive large amounts of data or secure
private communication over the Internet.

Encryption tools are very useful in keeping valuable information
hidden from hackers and you should use some sort of encryption
every time you access personal information, no matter it is used in
local operations or sent over the Internet.

9 Free Encryption Software Tools to Protect Your
Data

There are many encryption tools that can protect your
valuable information from data breaches and online crim-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 127

inals, but I have selected 9 free tools that can be used
fast to protect your data.

Lesson 9
Use strong passwords for your online accounts

Encrypting files is not so helpful if you don’t pay attention
to the password you set to access your encrypting pro-
grams, because your encryption is only as good as your
passwords.

1. LastPass

To protect your passwords and increase your online
safety, I recommend a password manager as LastPass.
Using this password manager, you’ll only need to remem-
ber one password, the one that you use to access Last-
Pass.

LastPass provides extensions for the main web browsers,
like Mozilla Firefox, Internet Explorer and Google Chrome.

When you access a new online account, it immediately
offers you the option to save the new credentials and
encourages you to set a unique and hard to break pass-
word for only one account. If you are using the same
password in multiple locations, it simply recommends
selecting a different password.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 128

Remember lesson 4? I hope you’ve already applied the
steps there, so that you can check this off and move on

Lesson 9 to the next thing!

Encrypt Your Hard Drive


2. BitLocker

There are a number of encryption tools that you can use
to protect your operating systems and our files from any
online danger.

But the easiest way to encrypt sensitive information or
maybe the entire hard-disk is to use Microsoft’s BitLocker
software, which is now installed on most Windows oper-
ating systems.

What exactly is BitLocker?

BitLocker is a full-disk encryption tool incorporated in the
latest Windows operating systems, which supports AES
(128 and 256-bit) encryption and it’s mainly used to en-
crypt the entire hard disk.

What is the AES encryption used by most security software?

The Advanced Encryption Standard has been tested and
improved and is now used worldwide by most security

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 129

vendors due to its high level of security and optimization.

Lesson 9 Why am I recommending this tool?

I simply recommend this tool because it is easy to use
and it is already accessible to many people that use the
Windows operating system.

BitLocker Drive Encryption is mainly a tool we can use to
prevent access breaches to any file from our hard-disk.
That’s because BitLocker encrypts the entire drive, which
makes it impossible for anyone stealing your laptop to
remove the hard drive and read the files.

3. VeraCrypt

VeraCrypt is free and it is available for Windows, OS X
and Linux operating systems. If you are used to TrueC-
rypt, then you will have no problem in using VeraCrypt,
which supports Advanced Encryption Standard and can
hide encrypted volumes within other volumes.

Though some people are still using TrueCrypt, I recom-
mend that you go for VeraCrypt because this tool is under
development and security updates are delivered for its
improvement.

Though VeraCrypt does not support TrueCrypt files, you

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 130

can convert them to its own format.


Lesson 9 Encrypt Your Files


4. 7Zip

There are many users that don’t want to encypt the entire
hard disk, but only files and documents that contain valu-
able data or information that needs to be sent over the
Internet.

7Zip is powerful and lightweight solution that is great by
its simplicity. As many users noticed, 7Zip is capable of
extracting most archives, the program is easy to use for
encrypting your own files and it uses one of the best
compression formats.


5. AxCrypt

Like 7Zip, AxCrypt is a lightweight free encryption tool
that integrates with Windows and you can use it mainly
for protecting valuable files from the system.

The files can be encrypted for a specific period of time
and can auto-decrypt later on, when that file reaches the
destination. It is a fast tool that enables the user to select
an entire folder or a group of files and encrypt them fast.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 131

As I mentioned at the beginning, its main purpose is to be
used for protecting files and not entire hard drives,

Lesson 9 though it does offer protection against major cracking
methods used by hackers.

Encrypt your Online Traffic

Encryption for private files is not enough. To increase
overall protection, you need to make sure your communi-
cation is not easily accessed by hackers or malicious
software.

So, how do you increase online security without creating too
many barriers that may slow us down between our comput-
ers and the content you want to access?

I have considered below a few simple tools you can use
to access online content and stay safe from privacy
breaches at the same time.


6. Access secure websites that use encryption mechanisms

To make sure you always access secure web pages, you
can use a browser extension like HTTPS Everywhere,
which works on Mozilla Firefox, Opera and Google
Chrome.

Though some security analysts argue that even on

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 132

secure websites a user is not completely safe, it is better
than nothing. After all, these secure websites use some

Lesson 9 encryption and authentication standards that are meant
to protect confidentiality of online activities.

In this case, for example, when your browser connects to
a secure website, there is an authentication process
which uses cryptography to verify that a secure connec-
tion is maintained.

For this reason, using a little extension like HTTPS Every-
where that encrypts your communication with major
websites makes your online presence more secure and
safe from cyber-crime.


7. Tor Browser – Access the Anonymity Network

What If I Want Complete Protection Online?

If you want complete privacy, you can use the Tor brows-
er, which allows you to access Internet anonymously
using the Tor network of computers.

The special Tor browser has been designed to be used by
anyone who wants to hide any browsing activity from
prying eyes.

But, what exactly is Tor?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 133

Tor is the short version of “The Onion Router” and it is the
browser that you download on the system, but also the

Lesson 9 Tor network of computers that manage the connections
and route the traffic.

By routing the online communication through multiple
systems in the Tor network, it is almost impossible for
any interested party to trace the traffic communication
back to the origin.

Finally, the number of computers in the network become
a highly effective layer of protection that conceals the
user identity.

You may have heard already about cases where Tor ano-
nymity network has been used for malicious purposes.

I understand that you may see some connections be-
tween online browsing and criminal activities, but as Tor
network representatives mention, they simply give
normal individuals the same privacy privileges that cy-
ber-criminals are already able to access.


8. Virtual Private Network – Encrypt Your Communication

Are there alternatives for becoming anonymous online?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 134

Yes, to connect in complete privacy to any online location
in the world, you can use a VPN, which is a Virtual Private

Lesson 9 Network.

This private network is able to spread across the normal
Internet space, using its resources to create an encrypted
channel that can keep your communication safe from
intercepting attempts.

Usually, a VPN is used by remote workers to access the
private company network and run online operations or
transfer highly confidential documents in complete priva-
cy.

Therefore, using a VPN software, you can make sure that
your web traffic and your valuable information remain
encrypted and cyber-criminals are prevented from sniff-
ing the data you exchange online.

But, VPN software is not just for corporate users, such a
software can also be used by a normal user when con-
necting from unsafe public networks or when they want
to access censored content.

To keep your online session private over the Internet, I
recommend a popular VPN solution like CyberGhost.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 135

9. Online Proxy Server – Hide Your IP Address

Lesson 9 If you don’t want to go through all the hassle of finding
and installing a VPN software or the Tor browser and be
suspected by your friends that you’re running some sus-
picious dark net activities on some underground market, I
still recommend a basic privacy measure, such as an
online proxy server.

Using a proxy server, you can simply hide your IP address
and surf online accessing websites anonymously.

Though a web proxy server cannot offer the encryption
channel you obtain from a VPN solution and is not able to
hide your online communication through an entire net-
work like Tor, you still have an indirect link between your
computer and the website you access, which is enough
protection for small size browsing activities on blocked or
censored web pages.

Encryption is not enough (either)

To keep your valuable information safe from cyber-crimi-
nals, encryption is not enough. No one single tool can
provide you with the complete protection you expect.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 136

The hackers’ arsenal contains a lot of software weapons
that you need to shield your systems from. Since there

Lesson 9 are so many dangers online, I would like to recommend a
few easy steps you can take to stay safe over the Inter-
net.

Keep your browser and your operating system updated
with the latest security patches. Make sure you have the
latest programs and applications on your system. Online
criminals spread malicious tools by using security
exploits to take advantage from your system’s vulnerabili-
ties.

Use a reliable security program from a big company. To
keep your system safe from the latest threats, the soft-
ware should include a real-time scanning engine, which
means that everything that you download is scanned. We
have dedicated lesson 6 to this topic.

Be careful when connecting to public and free wireless
networks. One of the favorite methods used by online
criminals to retrieve your credentials is by using wireless
sniffers to access data sent over unprotected networks.
As promised, in lesson 11 I’ll do a complete walk-through
in Wi-Fi networks protection.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  You need data encryption (even if you’re not a security specialist) 137

When you think about encryption, you need to set in
place not only a security strategy for your private com-

Lesson 9 puters, but ways to make sure personal information
doesn’t leave your computers while you go online.

For this reason, encryption should be applied not only to
sensitive files and documents from the local disk, but to
our online traffic, since in that environment are now
hidden the greatest threats.

Here’s what you can do right now:

Test the solutions that protect your Internet traffic and
check if any of them affect your online speed. If you are
OK with them, keep them further to maintain your online
privacy.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 10  /19

And the cyber
security
specialists said
secure thy
browsers or...



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 139

Hi there,

Lesson 10 In our previous guide, I presented 9 tools that you can use to encrypt
your files and your online traffic, but before you start using additional
means, shouldn’t you try first to improve your online safety by increasing
your browsers’ security settings?

Today, some of the most popular web browsers, like Internet Explorer,
Mozilla Firefox and Google Chrome are installed on most Windows
operating systems. For this reason, these 3 web browsers are the most
important tools most of us use for going online.

How your browsers are exposing you to cyber attacks
Before you can configure your browser and increase your online secu-
rity, you need to understand a few terms since you will have to deal
with them again frequently.

The features presented below are important for your browser’s opera-
tion and for your online security, therefore we must acknowledge their
role before we can decide if we need to disable them or not.

ActiveX is a software component or an add-on of Windows operating
systems and it is required by some websites to view certain elements
or take actions, improving the general browsing experience. At the
same time, online criminals use ActiveX in creating and adding mali-
cious ActiveX software to web pages in order to damage computers.

Java is a programming language developed to create applications on
our computers or active content on a website. Java has two parts: the

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 140

Java application that runs on our computers and the browser plug-in,
which we recommend you to disable unless you really use it.

Lesson 10 The Java browser plug-in opens up a great number of security holes
allowing hackers to access your personal data.

JavaScript is a programming language that makes web pages interac-
tive and is used mainly for displaying dynamic content, improving your
online experience. The problem with JavaScript is that many viruses
are script based and a great number of scripts can be dangerous being
used to perform a number of malicious tasks.

Cookies are files which are stored on your browser and hold some
amount of data about your browsing history. They can be accessed by
a website in order to improve your browsing session, though this
behavior has given rise to privacy concerns and security issues.

Extensions or add-ons are pieces of software that add or modify a
feature or a functionality in your web browser. Some of them allow you
to block ads, watch online videos or they are closely integrated in
social media websites improving your online session. The possible
issues which may appear from extensions is that some of them can be
used to inject ads into the sites you visit or track your entire browsing
activity.

Secure your web browsers:
Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome

You probably didn’t know this, but there is a right way to
configure your browser and there’s a wrong way. It is a

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 141

necessary step we need to take, because our web brows-
er is not setup for the best security in the default configu-

Lesson 10 ration.

If you choose not to take any action to secure your
browser, you may allow anything on our computers, from
malicious software applications to online criminals that
are more than prepared to take advantage of our weak-
nesses.

Though we cannot guarantee complete safety from mal-
ware attempts and online attacks, we know that following
the steps below will increase your web browser security.
At the same time, we cannot name one single browser as
the best possible selection for a user, since so many
studies and articles name one over the other.

For this reason, we will simply choose to present the 3
most popular web browsers for Windows: Google
Chrome, Internet Explorer and Mozilla Firefox.

 Internet Explorer (jump to section)

 Mozilla Firefox (jump to section)

 Google Chrome (jump to section)

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 142

Internet Explorer

Lesson 10 Microsoft Internet Explorer is one of the most popular
web browsers in the world. And it is quite normal, since it
arrives already integrated in our Windows operating sys-
tems. It supports Java and other active content, and it
also implements ActiveX technology.

To improve your overall security configuration in Win-
dows 10, you need to access your browser settings area.
Please make the necessary changes in case you are
using a different version of Internet Explorer.

To improve your Internet Explorer settings, access the
Internet Options area:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 143

Go to the Security tab from the top menu.

Lesson 10

In this area you will find multiple security zones for your
computer and you also have the possibility to customize
each security zone.

1. Increase Your Security Level
For the Internet zone we recommend you to select the
High security level. This selection will disable some
browser features, such as ActiveX, Active scripting and
Java, which acted sometimes as security breaches and
even open gates for online threats.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 144

2. Customize the Security Level
To customize the security settings for a zone, choose the

Lesson 10 Custom Level option.

In this area you can enable or disable specific security
options for your selected Internet area. To return to the
default levels for the selected Internet zone, simply click
the Reset… button available.

3. Add a website to the Trusted Sites List
If we return to the initial window and click the Trusted
sites option, we find a security zone for sites which are
safe to access.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 145

Lesson 10

If you consider a particular website to be a safe online
location that can be trusted, you can choose to add it to
this area. To do this, click Sites.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 146

In this area you can choose to add the website to a list of
safe web locations. You can also choose to remove a site

Lesson 10 from the list.

The Trusted sites zone is useful if you chose the High
security level for the Internet zone. Setting the High secu-
rity level in the Internet zone causes browser features like
ActiveX and Active scripting to stop functioning, and you
may encounter some websites that don’t function nor-
mally after that.

To solve this, simply go to the Trusted sites zone and add
the site that doesn’t function as it should. Adding the site
to the Trusted sites zone means that the website will
work normally, by loading the browser features that are
not allowed to function in the High security level.

4. Privacy Settings
The Privacy tab contains various settings for cookies in
Internet Explorer.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 147

Lesson 10

Cookies are text files that are placed in your computer by
websites you access. They contain data and information
the sites store about your browsing habits or your prefer-
ences. In this space you can use the pre-set privacy rules
available by using the slider and select one of the set-
tings for your Internet zone. For example, choosing the
High level will block cookies from most websites.

If you want to make modifications, you have other addi-
tional options.

To improve your security, select the Advanced button
available.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 148

Lesson 10

In this area, check the Override automatic cookie han-
dling option and select Prompt for both first and
third-party cookies. You will be asked each time a web-
site tries to place a cookie on your computer. For exam-
ple, if you visit an online shop associated with advertis-
ing, you may choose to block the cookie in order to pre-
vent the website from sending you ads and affect your
privacy.

If we go back to the Privacy tab and select the Sites…
button, we have the option to manage cookies for a spe-
cific website.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 149

Lesson 10

In this area, you can choose to allow or block cookies
from a particular website.

A last security step we recommend you to take in Internet
Explorer is in the Advanced tab.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 150

Lesson 10

This area contains settings that apply to all security
zones. From this tab, we recommend you to uncheck
Enable third-party browser extensions option. If you leave
it checked, different type of toolbars and add-ons are
enabled on your system and this may affect your privacy.
Many add-ons have proved to monitor your browsing
habits or even attempt to collect private data from your
browser.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 151

Mozilla Firefox

Lesson 10 Mozilla Firefox is another popular web browser and there
are a few steps we can take to improve its security set-
tings.

To increase your protection against online threats in Mo-
zilla Firefox (version 32.0.2), you need to access the set-
tings area. Please make the necessary changes in case
you are using a different version of Mozilla Firefox.

To access the settings area for Mozilla Firefox, select
Tools and Options.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 152

In the Options window, you need to access first of all the
General category from the top menu.

Lesson 10

1. Automatic download
Under this section, you can select the option Always ask
me where to save files. This way, you won’t have a web
location trying to automatically save dangerous content
to your computer. At the same time, you have the option
to place suspicious content in a location where you can
analyze it afterwards.

2. Tracking Settings
The next step is to access the Privacy category, where
you find the Tracking and History sections.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 153

Lesson 10

In the Tracking section, check Tell sites that I do not want
to be tracked. Selecting this option informs a website
that you would like to opt-out of third-party tracking for
advertising purposes.

3. Privacy Settings
In the History section, choose your browser Never
remember history, especially if you are using a computer
from a public location or you know that computer is used
by more people.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 154

For a more detailed configuration of your History section,
select from the drop-down menu Use custom settings for

Lesson 10 history.

4. Private Browsing Mode
You can also select Always use private browsing mode,
which we highly recommend if you find yourself in a
shared environment. Selecting this option ensures that
when you finish your Mozilla Firefox session, all brows-
ing, search and download history, and all the cookies are
removed.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 155

For a more detailed configuration of your online browsing
settings, choose from the available options.

Lesson 10
5. Malware and phishing protection

The last changes we need to make are in the Security
category.

First of all, make sure that the first 3 options Warn me
when sites try to install add-ons, Block reported attack
sites and Block reported web forgeries are all checked. In
case a site tries to install an add-on, you will see a warn-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 156

ing at the top of the browser about this.

Lesson 10 6. Passwords Security
Further on, the Passwords section contains various op-
tions to store and manage your passwords and we rec-
ommend you to use this option if you let Mozilla Firefox
take care of your credentials. In the same location you
can find a Master Password feature, which helps you
encrypt data on the system.

Google Chrome

Google Chrome is a web browser used by more and more
people in the last years and there are a few actions we
can also take here to increase our online security.

To start making the necessary modifications, we need to
access the Settings area. Again, please make the neces-
sary changes in case you are using a different version of
Google Chrome.

To access the settings area for Google Chrome, click the
available button at the top right corner of the browser and
select Settings from the drop-down menu.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 157

Lesson 10

1. (Don’t) Sync your Google Account

As soon as you access the Settings area, you will notice
at the top, in the Sign-in section, Advanced sync set-
tings…

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 158

Google Chrome gives you the possibility to sync your
settings and data with other systems or mobile devices

Lesson 10 where you signed-in with your Google account. This cre-
ates a vulnerability risk, since you are required by default
to connect with only your Google account on a device
that syncs with your other systems or devices (where you
have added your Google account).

To improve your security, you need to set a passphrase,
which is an additional credential required to sync your
devices.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 159

If you scroll down at the bottom of the page, you will see
a Show advanced settings… option.

Lesson 10

Click the link in order to access the advanced settings
available.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 160

2. Privacy Settings

Lesson 10

The Clear browsing data… option gives you the possibility
to delete your browsing history, so don’t forget to use that
option if you are using a computer in a shared environ-
ment.

The Content settings… option gives you more possibili-
ties to address and improve your overall browsing securi-
ty.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 161

Lesson 10

To make the necessary changes in the Content settings
window, you will need to scroll down in order to access
the other options.

If you want to restrict cookies from being stored on your
browser and using the collected information about your
browsing habits, use the available options. Another
option in that area is to disable JavaScript, a vulnerability
issue exploited by hackers over the years.

Scrolling down, you find other options:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 162

Lesson 10

3. Plug-ins
You can control the behavior of your browser plug-ins
and decide if your browser plug-ins should start automat-
ically or not.

4. Pop-up Blocker
You can block pop-ups from disturbing your browsing
sessions.

5. Location Tracking
Or, you can stop a website from tracking your physical
location

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 163

6. Plugin Access Control
If you continue scrolling down to the bottom of the Con-

Lesson 10 tent settings window, you will find the option to block
websites from using a plug-in to access your computer.

7. Automatic Download
There is also available the option to block sites from
downloading multiple files automatically on your comput-
er, which is a possible vulnerability that could affect your
online security.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 164

5 extensions for a better online session

Lesson 10 To improve your browser security you had to make minor
adjustments to your web browser, but for a complete pro-
tection in the online environment, you need to install
some of the best extensions available.

Browser extensions are small software programs that
improve and personalize your online experience. With so
many extensions (or add-ons) out there, it is difficult to
make the right choice. Some of them address your need
for privacy, others your need for protection and security
while browsing on various websites, from sites where you
pay taxes to sites where you simply access your online
banking account. Since there is a long list, I will try to
present you only some of the best extensions that block
sites from tracking you, block ads and scripts and keep
you safe on unknown web locations.

Using a browser extension you have a greater control
over your browser behavior. You can block ads from some
websites and pop-ups that may act like carriers for finan-
cial and data stealing malware. At the same time, you
have the possibility to block others from breaching your
privacy settings. But, you should also be aware that you
need to test these extensions and know what they are
capable of doing.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 165

Block ads and pop-up windows with AdBlock Plus

Lesson 10 AdBlock Plus is an extension for Mozilla Firefox and
Google Chrome that can be used mainly for blocking ads
and pop-up windows. It has the ability to stop you from
accessing web locations controlled by hackers and it can
also disable third-party tracking from websites. It is easy
to use, without losing time with too difficult to use set-
tings and options.

Don’t want to be tracked? Use Disconnect and Do Not Track
Me

There have been some talks recently in the online envi-
ronment about finding the best solution for stopping
companies in tracking your browsing habits while navi-
gating online.

Disconnect, available for Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome
and Internet Explorer is a very useful extension which
manages to:

block third party tracking cookies
control the scripts on the site using a simple toolbar
menu
blocks your social media account from tracking your
browsing history and private data

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 166

Do Not Track Me, available for Mozilla Firefox, Google
Chrome and Internet Explorer, comes with a browser tool-

Lesson 10 bar that indicates the tracking cookies, scripts and
plug-ins that function on the site and gives you the option
to choose which one you want to disable, leaving the
others to continue working.

Stay safe with HTTPS Everywhere and Web of Trust

HTTPS Everywhere, available for Mozilla Firefox and
Google Chrome, is a popular security tool for online
browsing. In a few words, what this extension does is to
look for secure versions of the websites you access and
use them, instead of their lesser safe versions. If you en-
counter issues with some websites that don’t work on
https://, you simply place that website on a list so that
you may access it.

Web of Trust, available for Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome
and Internet Explorer, ranks websites by reputation and
helps you establish if the site you want to access has
hosted malware or contains tracking cookies which could
affect your system security. Though it doesn’t block ads
from that web location, it helps you by mentioning the
rank of the site you want to access and gives you the
option to make a conscious decision on your next step.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  And the cyber security specialists said secure thy browsers or... 167

In this fight for online protection, keeping your main tool
– the BROWSER - secure is a vital step. That is why your

Lesson 10 operating system defense should contain multiple layers
of protection, from security products to the web browser,
the central tool we use to access our social media ac-
counts, our email addresses and our online banking web-
sites.

Though you may already have a security product right
now, just remember you can always return to this guide
when necessary and choose the best antivirus solution
for your system.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 11  /19

Are you
protected from
cyber attacks
delivered via
Wi-fi? Find out:



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 169

Hi there,

Lesson 11 In the previous lesson we talked about increasing online safety by
adjusting the browser’s security settings, but do you know how to
protect your valuable data on public Wi-Fi networks that are anything but
safe?

 Home Wi-Fi Networks (jump to section)
 Public Wi-Fi Networks (jump to section)

And how exactly do you increase security on your own home Wi-Fi net-
work?

Before we follow the steps that should be taken to increase protection
for a home wireless network, I would like to give you some valuable
insights on how to defend your privacy on public wireless networks.

So it is okay if I use public WI-Fi to buy stuff online, check out my
online banking account or entering passwords to crucial websites?

The answer is simple: No.

That’s because public networks can be quite easily breached by hack-
ers and malicious software.

And if you have no choice but using them, you need to employ a few
tricks or follow some general guidelines to avoid any possible intrusion
or identity theft.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 170

11 Security Steps to Stay Safe on Public Wi-Fi
Networks

Lesson 11

1. Turn off your public network sharing options

If you’re using your home or work network you may feel
safe enough to allow network resources sharing, like
printers or public folders, but on an unsafe public net-
work, this is not recommended. Usually, the public wire-
less networks are not subjects to high levels of security
and are favorite places for hackers and malicious soft-
ware.

To turn off public sharing, follow these steps:

1. Go to your Windows Control Panel.
2. Access the Network and Sharing Center window.
3. Click Change Advanced Sharing Settings.
4. Select the Public profile.
5. Turn off File Sharing, Network Discovery, and Public

Folder Sharing, in case they aren’t already OFF. Usually,
by simply choosing that you are connecting on a Public
network, these options are automatically turned off.
(The steps may differ on different Windows operating
systems.)

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 171

Lesson 11

2. Keep the Firewall Enabled

Make sure your Windows firewall is turned on. If you are
using a security product that provides a better firewall,
make sure it is still enabled. Sometimes, when you’re
trying to access an online location and notice a
slow-down, you disable it temporarily and forget to
enable it back.

To check, access the Control Panel window, go to System
and Security and select Windows Firewall.
(The steps may differ on different Windows operating
systems.)

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 172

3. Use secure websites for sensitive operations

Lesson 11 First of all, I don’t recommend running any important
operation or financial transaction on a public wireless
network. This being said, if you still need to use a public
network to check your bank balance, make sure you visit
a secure website.

To know you’re using a secure site, look to the left of the
web address and find the “Lock” icon. This indicates you
are on an encrypted or verified location.
At the same time, check the web address starts with
“https://“. The “S” is from “secure socket layer” and you
know you are going to a site where communication is
encrypted.

If you don’t want checking all the time the web address,
use HTTPS Everywhere, which is available for Firefox,
Chrome, and Opera. This little extension has the role to
encrypt your communications with many major websites,
making your browsing more secure and safe from online
criminals.

Even if you don’t use this extension, many sites like Face-
book or Gmail use https automatically. In the end, we’ll
say again that sensitive browsing, where important cre-
dentials or financial data are used, should not be run on
public networks.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 173

4. Use a Virtual Private Network

Lesson 11 Public networks are favorite places for cybercriminals to
retrieve sensitive data by using wireless sniffers in order
to obtain communication details sent over the unsafe
network.

To increase your connection security you can use a “pri-
vate browsing” session, which means that your browsing
history will not be kept locally. But this doesn’t mean that
the Internet Service Provider or the network administrator
will be blocked from “listening” to your online session.

For a greater degree of security, you can start using a
VPN, which is a Virtual Private Network.

The VPN hides your IP address by encrypting your con-
nection and allowing you to browse online in anonymity.
Using this method you protect your online privacy and
you keep your valuable information from cyber threats,
online scams, identity breaches or phishing attempts.

To keep your online session private on public wireless
networks, I recommend a popular VPN solution like
CyberGhost.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 174

5. Turn the Wi-Fi connection OFF

Lesson 11 Are you done using the Wi-Fi network? Then don’t forget to
turn it off.

There is no reason to stay connected more than you
need. The more you stay connected, the more chances
are for your system to be noticed by cybercriminals or
malicious software. At the same time, this helps your
laptop save the battery life.

6. Update and patch everything

Keep your Windows operating system up-to-date

Always keep your system up-to-date with the latest secu-
rity updates and patches available.

To take the security updates automatically, follow these
steps:

1. Go to your Windows Control Panel window.
2. Select Windows Update and click Change settings.
3. Make sure Install updates automatically is selected.

It is important to have the latest security updates for your
Windows operating system, because they contain stabili-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 175

ty fixes and patches that keep your system safe from
cybercriminal attempts that try to benefit from any secu-

Lesson 11 rity hole.

Update your software with the latest patches

I know that online criminals try to benefit from security
holes in popular software we use on our computers, like
Java, Adobe Flash or popular web browsers like Chrome,
Mozilla or Internet Explorer.

For this reason, I would recommend you have the latest
updates or security patches for the software you are
using. Or if you don’t want to bother checking and keep-
ing the vulnerable applications up-to-date every day, I
recommend using a free dedicated solution to do the job.

7. Don’t connect to a public network without a reliable anti-
virus

It is important to have a good antivirus product from a
big security company, which should include real-time
scanning, firewall and automatic update capabilities. Go
back to lesson 5 If you need advice on how to pick the
right AV for your system (and budget).

8. Don’t browse without a good anti-spyware solution

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 176

First, what do you mean by spyware?

Lesson 11 Without going into too much information, Here’s how your
system would behave if it were infected with spyware:

pop-up windows are everywhere
error messages appear without notice and they don’t
seem to go easily
web browser search engine has been replaced with
something fishy
web browser home page is not the one you set
unknown toolbars appear in your browser
slow down affects every step you take

How do I become a spyware-fighting hero?

Spyware can affect us on any type of network, but on an
open public network the online dangers could affect our
computers even more.

To keep your system protected from spyware, I need to
point out the importance of using anti-spyware solutions
from well established companies in the online sphere, like
Spybot Search and Destroy, Lavasoft’s Ad-Aware, Mal-
warebytes and others.

And finally, I just have to say it again. Even if you install

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 177

20 security solutions to keep you safe online, unless you
adopt some good security practices you won’t be safe

Lesson 11 online:

stay away from clicking fishing links or random pop-up
windows
don’t reply to strange questions in your web browser or
your email inbox
don’t just go online downloading any application you see

9. Don’t run financial transactions without special protec-
tion

I have to say it again:

I strongly advise against running financial transactions or
inserting sensitive or valuable information when using a
public unsafe network!

Nevertheless, if you Really, really, REAAAAAAALLY need
to access your bank account or pay online, I recommend
a special security solution that can stop malicious soft-
ware from retrieving sensitive data and block cybercrimi-
nal actions before they affect your system.

Next-gen anti-hacking tools (the stars of lesson 6) are an
extra security layer that aredesigned to complete your

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 178

online safety.

Lesson 11 10. Secure your browser before you go online

We go online by using our web browsers and for this
reason, we need to secure these tools correctly before we
access any website.

And let’s not forget that browsers are applications which,
without the proper security updates, may become access
doors for online criminals that attempt to steal data by
using unpatched security holes.

Therefore, to increase the online security, especially when
using a public wireless network, follow these guidelines:

Make sure you have the latest browser version and you
have installed the latest security patches.
Access and modify your browser’s security settings. Go
back to lesson 11 for step-by-step instructions (and actu-
ally change your settings, if you haven’t yet).
Use the private browsing session before you access a
website. This option will not keep your browsing history
recorded locally. After selecting the private browsing ses-
sion, go to your search engine and look for free proxy or
something similar, access the proxy and insert the web-
site address you want to reach. There are many free

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 179

proxy sites online, so it’s quite easy to find one.
For an increased protection, download online a popular

Lesson 11 and reliable VPN software, like CyberGhost, and make
sure data you send and receive is encrypted and cannot
be accessed by prying eyes.


11. Use two-factor authentication everywhere

This option is actually an extra security step that can
protect your popular online account. It may be your Face-
book, Twitter or Gmail account. Or it may be any other
online account that provides the two-factor authentica-
tion.

This extra security step increases your online protection
by making sure that besides your credentials, which may
be retrieved by hackers, you are required to enter an addi-
tional one-time code, which is sent to your mobile phone.

It is always useful to consult an extended list of pro-
grams and web apps, before selecting one for your
system.

The steps above can be followed on public Wi-Fi net-
works to increase your data protection. At the same time,
don’t forget we are talking about some of the less pro-
tected areas of the Internet and you should avoid running

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 180

important sensitive actions in this spaces.

Lesson 11
Home Wireless Network Security

Though somehow less exposed to hackers and other
dangers that exist on public wireless networks, our own
home Wi-Fi networks can also become targets to cyber-
criminal attacks.

Present households shelter a number of mobile devices
that are linked to the Internet and we are not talking just
about laptops and mobile phones, but TVs and other de-
vices that we include in the Internet of Things area.

And this connectivity between our devices poses security
risks for our private data and sensitive financial informa-
tion.

Though relatively easy to use and access, Wi-Fi networks
are not always SAFE networks. For this reason, we need
to learn how to protect our wireless home networks from
malicious intrusions.

10 Steps to Maximize your Home Wireless
Network Security

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 181

1. Change the name of your home wireless network

Lesson 11 As soon as your home wireless network has been set in
place, you need to change the SSID (Service Set Identifi-
er). This is the name of your home network, the name
other mobile devices will see when trying to connect to
the Internet by using the wireless network from your
home.

The reason you need to change its name is quite easy to
guess. Modifying the name increases the difficulty for a
hacker to gain access to your network.

Usually, router manufacturers assign the name of the
company that produced the router and it could be some-
thing like “Linksys“, “Cisco” or “Belkin“.
In case the SSID is not modified, a hacker has a better
chance of breaking into a network, simply by knowing the
manufacturer of the router. Use this guide to make the
necessary changes.

And one more thing related to this step: Do not use your
name or your family name in order to avoid being identi-
fied as the owner of the network. This is another detail
that could give an advantage for a potential hacker or for
an online criminal that might attempt an identity theft
operation.


www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 182

2. Choose a strong and unique password for your wireless
network

Lesson 11
Your wireless router comes pre-set with a default pass-
word. The problem is that this default password is easy
to guess by hackers, especially is they know the manu-
facturer’s name for the router. See step 1 above.
When setting a good password for your wireless network,
make sure it is at least 20 characters long and includes
numbers, letters and various symbols.

This setting will prevent other people from accessing
your network. Though usually, it is nothing more serious
than some neighbor “stealing” from your network band-
width speed, you may have to deal with other more chal-
lenging situations, like online criminals that can access
your network to “listen” to your traffic data and retrieve
sensitive information.

Increase your security by enabling network encryption

There are a few popular encryption options for wireless
networks, like WEP,WPA and WPA2. The latter form of
encryption – WPA2 – is preferred for its improved securi-
ty and especially if you have a home network.

The option to encrypt traffic is useful if you need to make
your communication signals unusable for any unautho-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 183

rized third party software.

Lesson 11 At this moment all wireless devices out there support this
technology and it is common knowledge to use WPA2,
which has a greater degree of security.


4. Disable the wireless network when you’re not at home

This option is useful especially when leaving home for
extended periods of time, for a vacation or for a few days.

This security measure, besides helping you to reduce
power consumption, it will surely stop any hackers that
could “listen” to your network’s traffic or might try to
access it for malicious purposes.


5. Where in hour home did you set up your router?

It could be a good idea to place the wireless router as
close as possible to the middle of your house. And it’s
not just for every place or room in the house to have
same access to the Internet, but because you don’t want
to have your wireless signal range reach too much out-
side your house, where it can be easily received by hack-
ers.

For this reason, don’t place it too close to a window, from
where the signal can be easily accessed from outside,

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 184

even at some distance, and you may also follow our
fourth rule to disable the router when leaving your home.

Lesson 11
6. Choose a strong password for your network administrator

To set up your wireless router, usually you need to access
an online platform or web page, where you can make
modifications to your network settings.

As everybody knows, it is something normal to find a
router with default credentials such as “admin” and
“password”. And these default login credentials are not so
difficult to break by a hacker.

Most changes we do on an online platform are things like
setting a strong password for the wireless network or
changing the network’s name, both changes being made
to ensure a greater level of protection from online crimi-
nals’ malicious actions.

But if an IT criminal is able to access the administrator
platform and gain access to your network’s setup and
configuration settings, this will ruin your day for sure.


7. Disable Remote Access

Normally, you can access your router’s interface from a
device connected to your network, but some routers

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 185

allow access even from remote systems. To stop online
hackers access to your router’s private settings, it is safe

Lesson 11 to disable this option in your router’s settings.

To make this change, access the web interface and
search for “Remote access” or “Remote Administration“.


8. Keep your router’s software up-to-date

Consider your router’s software like any other software
you have on your operating system. It may be your antivi-
rus program or any other application running on the
system. The router’s firmware, like any other software,
contains flaws which can become major vulnerabilities,
unless they are quickly fixed by firmware releases from
the manufacturer.

The problem is that most routers don’t have the option to
install the latest security updates and from time to time
you need to check the official website for security fixes.

We must not forget that some of the worst security
breaches came from security holes in unpatched pro-
grams and operating systems.


9. Make sure you have a good firewall

Some routers have their own firewalls that can help block

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 186

hackers from accessing your computer.

Lesson 11 In case your router doesn’t have such a firewall, make
sure you install a good firewall solution on your system to
watch for malicious access attempts to your wireless
network.

These days, most people use the firewall solution provid-
ed by their operating systems, which is a good option. In
case you are using a security software that contains a
firewall, it is a good option to turn it on.


10. Protect the devices that connect most frequently to your
wireless network

Don’t leave any door open for online criminals!

Though you may have secured your router and your wire-
less network, you need to make sure you are not leaving
any security breach that can be exploited by IT criminals.
Therefore, follow some general and common sense
guidelines to stay away from online dangers, like having
the latest software available installed on the system and
the latest security patches downloaded to ensure no se-
curity hole or breach is left open to online predators.

Even more, check what devices connect mostly to your
home network and make sure they have security soft-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you protected from cyber attacks delivered via Wi-fi? Find out: 187

ware installed against the viruses and spyware.
And finally, use a specialized security software to protect

Lesson 11 your devices from financial and data stealing malware,
cybercriminals and malicious hacker servers.

Wi-Fi networks symbolize the power of Internet, its free-
dom to spread knowledge and information everywhere
and at almost no cost.

At the same time, these networks are not the most
secure places on Internet and cybercriminal minds are
lurking everywhere.

To continue using a public or a home network, you need
to make sure you followed some of the steps above.

I tried to be thorough in this lesson and cover both public
and home Wi-Fi networks.

This way, you have all the security steps to stay safe on
wireless networks and you can always return to this
guide when necessary to increase your online protection.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 12  /19

Keep cyber
criminals out of
your inbox for
good. Here’s
how



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 189

Just like me, you probably have various social media accounts, bank-
ing accounts and we often subscribe to many sites and online

Lesson 12 services.

But, if you can unsubscribe from a site, close or change your social
media platform and even change the bank, you definitely keep your
email address for a long time.

At the same time, for the same reasons I mentioned above, no one can
actually stay online without an email Account.

And it’s not just about confirming your websites subscriptions, but
where else could you receive any private data from an online location, if
not directly to your personal email address?

And by private data I mean: financial operations, passwords, profes-
sional details and sensitive information.

For an IT criminal, getting access to your email account is the first
step in operating an online identity theft. Therefore, this vital compo-
nent cannot be ignored and treated easily.

Before I mention all the necessary steps you can take to improve your
online email account security, you need to take a quick look at the
most popular web-based email services and the security options you
can take for each one of them.

Though there are many other online email services, I will include in this
security analysis only the 4 most popular web-based email providers

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 190

at this moment: Yahoo!, Gmail, Aol and Outlook.

Lesson 12 The final part of our security analysis consists in presenting the gener-
al guidelines you need to follow to keep your online email account
safe.

The Complete Guide to Email Security

 Yahoo (jump to section)

 Gmail (jump to section)

 Aol (jump to section)

 Outlook (jump to section)

Protect Your Yahoo! Mail Account

Yahoo! mail service is probably the most popular email
account in the world at this moment. How many of us
didn’t create an email address with Yahoo! more than 10
years ago? So, our relationship with this email provider
goes a long way and we cannot ignore it.

To make the necessary changes in your email account,

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 191

you need to access your Yahoo! mail profile settings:

Lesson 12 To make the necessary changes in your email account,
you need to access your Yahoo! mail profile settings:

1. Update your contact information

It is important to add an alternative email address and a
mobile phone number so that you may be contacted in
case of trouble. If you have problems in accessing your
online email account, you can have a recovery link sent to
the alternative email address or an SMS message deliv-
ered to your mobile phone.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 192

2. Set up your second sign-in verification

Lesson 12 This is probably the most important security setting you
can set in your Yahoo! account. This second step verifi-
cation adds an extra level of protection for your email
address. To activate this security step, you need to add
your phone number to the Yahoo! account. At the same
time, you have the possibility to set 2 additional security
questions for an easier access to your online account.
Setting these security questions and choosing them for
the second sign-in verification allows you a faster and
easier access.

3. View your recent sign-in activity

Don’t forget to verify your account login history and make
sure only you connected to your email address account.

4. Delete other accounts used to sign in

Did you connect to your Yahoo! mail from a different ac-
count? This place allows you to remove that connection
and all information associated to your account.

Protect Your Gmail Account

Gmail service has become in the recent years – together

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 193

with Google Chrome – one of the most popular email
services and it’s being used not only for personal purpos-

Lesson 12 es, but also increasingly for professional correspon-
dence.

To make the necessary changes in your Gmail account,
you need to access your Gmail settings:

Instead of sending you through all the available steps
from that location, I recommend using the Security
check-up option above and review your Gmail security
settings.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 194

Therefore, click Get Started and follow these steps:

Lesson 12 1. Check your recovery information

The most important security settings available in that
location are to set a recovery phone and an alternative
email address, where you can be contacted in case an
unusual activity takes place on your account. In the same
location, you can set a security question.

Make the necessary changes and click Done to continue.

2. Check your recent activity

Review the connections list to spot any unfamiliar activi-
ty. Click Looks good to continue.

3. Check your account permissions

Verify the list of apps, websites and devices that are con-
nected to your account. Choose to remove those you
don’t use anymore and click Done to continue.

4. Check your app passwords

Have you generated a password for an app that you don’t
use anymore? Click Revoke or select Done to continue.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 195

5. Check your 2-step verification settings

Lesson 12 In this location you can make sure you have the verifica-
tion messages sent to the right phone number and you
are also able to set up a backup phone, in case you lose
access to your own phone. For more settings, follow the
corresponding link. Click Done to finish the security
check-up and go back to your account settings.

Protect Your Outlook Account

Outlook.com appeared in 2012 and it has replaced the old
Hotmail web-based email service provided by Microsoft
for more than 10 years.

To make the necessary changes in your Outlook account,
you need to access your Outlook advanced settings.

Follow these steps:

1. Access your profile settings.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 196

Lesson 12

2. Click Security & privacy.

3. Choose Manage advanced security in the new window.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 197

Lesson 12

In this location you can make the necessary changes for
your Outlook account.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 198

4. Update your contact information

Lesson 12 The most important security change you can make to
your account is to add an alternative email address and a
phone number where you can be contacted.

5. Set up the 2-step verification

Add an extra layer of protection to your -mail account.
Click the corresponding option to set-up this security
option and decide if you want to connect to your account
using a security code sent to your phone number, a
smartphone app or recovery codes written down in order
to be used later on.

If you go back, you have the same options available:

Identify verification apps – to use an app from your
smartphone.
Recovery code – to print the recovery codes and keep
them in a safe location.
Trusted devices – remove those devices you don’t use
anymore to connect to your email account.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 199

Protect Your AOL Mail Account

Lesson 12 AOL mail service is at this moment among the most pop-
ular web-based mail services in the world, especially in
the United States.
To make the necessary changes in your AOL account, you
need to access your general account information.

Follow these steps:

1. Access your Account Info from the top right corner.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 200

2. You may need to insert the answer for the secret ques-
tion you set before getting access to the General account

Lesson 12 information.

In this window, under Account Recovery Information, you
have the option to add an alternative email address and a
phone number where you can be contacted.

12 Guidelines to Complete your Email Security
As you have seen above, the most important security
option you can take in our email account settings is the
option to add a second step log-in verification.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 201

This extra level of protection for your email account
means that you’ll need to provide an additional security

Lesson 12 code that you receive to your phone number by SMS.
Though I did not find this security option in AOL mail ser-
vice, I found the options of setting another back-up email
address and a phone number where you can be reached
in case of trouble.

BUT, email protection is not everything.

To stay safe online, no matter where you are or what you
do, you need to think and adopt a strategic vision and
imagine a complete security policy. Browsing online, net-
working on social media platforms, running financial op-
erations or opening an email, it’s all about staying safe.

To complete your email security, you need to adopt a
strategic vision and follow these steps no matter what
web-based email service you are using:


1. Set a strong password for your account.

Make sure you include capital letters, numbers and sym-
bols so that it may be difficult to be compromised. Don’t
use the same password for more online accounts or
email services. In case one online account is breached
and the particular password for that account is used in
other online locations too, you risk having the other ac-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 202

counts accessed by the same hackers.

Lesson 12 Remember you can always go back to lesson 4 on pass-
word management when you need to.


2. Create and use more than one email address

To limit the potential information breach, I recommend
using 2 separate email addresses in order to keep per-
sonal data away from professional information.

This way, you can limit a potential loss in case one of
your email addresses is accessed by hackers.

At the same time, you can add one email address in the
other email account’s security options and make sure
you can be contacted at any moment.

Make sure you don’t use the same password for both
email addresses!


3. Be careful when setting up a security question

To set a security question in your email account is a good
privacy step and you should not ignore it, if you have this
option. But, pay attention and set a question that only
you can answer, not a piece of information that anyone
can find by simply following your Facebook profile. So, no

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 203

dog or cat name or anything that you have already shared
with the world.

Lesson 12
4. Don’t jump connecting to any free public Wi-Fi network

I know how happy one can be when discovering by
chance a free wireless network in a public space. But is
your private data safe from a potential IT criminal nearby
that can’t wait to intercept your communication?

Are you really prepared to face an advanced criminal
mind, who does this for a living? No, you’re not.

But since we know you won’t resist the temptation to go
into the wild, just don’t do these 2 things: don’t connect
to your email address account and don’t run any financial
transaction!

Resume your online traffic to simple browsing and don’t
insert any sensitive information.

Remember the last lesson, the one on Wi-fi security? I
hope you acted on it. If not, you can still go back to it and
do it. ASAP!


5. Delete all your traffic history when connecting to a public
computer

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 204

There are situations when you need to connect to your
email address from a public computer in a new location

Lesson 12 and you’re not sure about its security settings. This hap-
pens to all of us and it’s rather normal. But don’t forget to
follow a few easy-to-follow steps to stay secure before
you leave the public location.

As soon as you finish your online session, make sure you
take these steps:

log out of your email account.
delete any browsing history, together with any temporary
files, cookies are passwords that you may have inserted
in the browser.
close the browser.

To make sure there won’t be anything recorded during the
browsing period, you better use an incognito mode or a
private browsing session.

6. Choose to use the 2-step authentication option in your
email account

I know. I have already mentioned this one, but it is so
important that I need to emphasize it again. Choosing to
use this security step demands from you to add a second
security code sent by SMS to your phone number. Use
this method to make sure your online accounts are ac-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 205

cessed only by you.

Lesson 12 Though the first three email services above provide this
security option (and I recommend you to use it), there are
other email providers that have not included the 2-step
authentication yet. Since I am a big fan of this security
option, I recommend you using an email service that pro-
vides this important security step.


7. Avoid phishing email scams

Most successful online scams have always started with
an initial email message sent to a potential victim.
Though an online scam can occur on social media net-
works or when you shop online, most infamous scams
have always seemed to appear by email.

Since I cannot mention here most popular online scams, I
have to mention the dangerous phishing emails, which
are supposed to convince the victim click an email link or
download/run an email attachment. As soon as this
action takes place, a malicious software is installed on
the system or the victim is sent to a login page from a
fake website in order to operate identity theft or retrieve
the banking credentials.

This is one of the most popular hacking techniques to
steal financial information and usually there is no other

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 206

way to stay safe from this malicious attempt, but prevent
the initial infection phase.

Lesson 12
8. Use a good antivirus product that offers real-time protec-

tion

A reliable antivirus software is important for your overall
system security. One that contains a real-time scanning
option is even better. Though most web-based email ser-
vices offer antivirus scanning, if you receive an archived
password-protected file from someone, a potential infec-
tion won’t be detected and removed.

For this reason, you need to have on the system your own
security software with a real-time scanning module, so
that any downloaded and decrypted file could be
scanned as soon as possible.


9. Keep your software updated

Most software vulnerabilities occur when we miss to
install the latest security updates and patches. It may be
your operating system or your vulnerable applications
and software, it is important to keep them all up to date.

Are you using popular applications like Adobe Acrobat
Reader, Java, Adobe Flash, Adobe Shockwave or web
browsers like Chrome, Mozilla Firefox or Internet Explor-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 207

er? Then you better make sure you have the available
patches installed.

Lesson 12 In case such an unfortunate event affects your system,
try to limit the potential losses by using different creden-
tials for your email address and your online accounts.


10. Keep your private data safe online

Don’t use private information on social media networks.
Don’t use family names as passwords.
Don’t reply to suspicious emails with sensitive informa-
tion.
Check your email account activity and your social media
profile connections.

11. Use a specialized security software against spyware

One of the most popular ways of spreading spyware is by
email spam campaigns. I know that you are always care-
ful with your email address and the emails you receive in
your inbox. But it takes only one wrong click on a mali-
cious link or an email attachment and spyware is
installed on your system.

Since it is better to prevent and take action sooner than
later, I recommend using a reliable anti-spyware product.
You can find online a few good anti-spyware products like
Spybot Search and Destroy, Lavasoft’s Ad-Aware, Mal-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 208

warebytes, etc.

Lesson 12 And again, if you receive a strange suspicious email,
follow these simple guidelines:

don’t click suspicious links in emails
don’t reply an email if you’re not sure about the sender
don’t download or click email attachments that seem
unsafe for your system


12. Access your web-based email service from a secure
browser

Most of us use an email address from a browser, so it is
an important part of our online security strategy. Not to
forget that any vulnerability from our browser may
become very valuable for a hacker.

To access your emails in complete security from a secure
browser, follow these steps:

choose the latest version for your browser and make sure
the latest security patches are installed. Don’t leave any
door open for a cybercriminal.
access and increase the security and privacy levels in
your browser.
are you accessing your online email address from an
unsafe public computer or from a web browser you don’t

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Keep cyber criminals out of your inbox for good. Here’s how 209

trust? In this case, choose to go for a private browsing
session and avoid having your browsing history, creden-

Lesson 12 tials and other details stored by the web browser.

Lesson 10 will teach you all about browser security.

Thanks for sticking with me until the end!
I hope this guide will help you increase online security for
your email account.

The possibility to hack an email address is a tempting action
for any criminal mind, since in this location you often keep
banking and financial information, usernames and pass-
words for our online accounts.

If you think about the Internet as a big bad world where
you can just walk around and interact with other people
or with public and private entities, then the email address
account can be considered as your HOME.

And what else is more important to protect?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 13  /19

Share. Tweet.
Protect.
Repeat.
Social media,
the safe way



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 211

Social media is part of our lives. And many times, when you think
about social media, you tend to think of Facebook, Twitter and Linke-

Lesson 13 dIn.
Facebook, for example, spread so much that even our parents, neigh-
bors and distant relatives (even from remote areas of the country) now
have a Facebook account.

Since these social platforms are so popular and the distinction
between public and private is blurred, these online services attract
dangerous elements that are interested in retrieving our sensitive
information. And in this point you may become a victim to identity
theft and malicious actions from online criminals.

So, how do I balance using social media and keeping confidential informa-
tion confidential?

 Facebook (jump to section)
 Twitter (jump to section)
 LinkedIn (jump to section)

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 212

Protect Your Facebook Account
Lesson 13 Since Facebook is probably the biggest and most popular

online network right now, I will try to go deeper into this
platform’s privacy and security settings and then present
shortly 10 additional steps you can follow to stay safe
online.

Access your Facebook Settings

To access your Facebook account settings, start by
going to the top right corner of your screen and select
Settings from the drop-down menu.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 213

Note: Though I can classify actions and steps in security
and privacy sections, I believe it is easier for you to follow

Lesson 13 me, as I take each section and discuss it before I contin-
ue to the next, as it appears in the Facebook settings
menu.

General Account Settings

By clicking the Settings button, you should see the Gen-
eral Account Settings on the left hand side of the page in
the provided sidebar.

In this location you can update your Facebook account
password and Download a copy of your Facebook data.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 214

Security Settings

Lesson 13 Let’s continue on the left hand side of the page with the
Security Settings.

Login Notifications

This option allows you to opt in to receive Text and Email
messages when your account is accessed from an un-
known computer or mobile device. This is very useful in
case a hacker tries to access your account.

Login Approvals

Turning on this option will require a security code to be
generated in order to access the account on a new
browser. You have three options:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 215

have a security code sent by SMS to your mobile device;
generate a security code by Code Generator in your Face-

Lesson 13 book mobile device app, if you have an Internet connec-
tion;
pre-generate 10 codes that you can print on a piece of
paper and use them when you don’t have your phone with
you;

This layer of security is also meant to keep other people
from accessing your Facebook account.

Code Generator

This option is used with Login Approvals to create codes
that you can use to access your Facebook account from
a new browser.

App Passwords

This option helps you create single use passwords to
access third party applications on Facebook and keep
your main Facebook password safe. When you log out of
the application, the password is not saved. To access the
third party application again, you will need to generate a
new password.

Trusted Contacts

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 216

Select close friends to contact if you have any trouble
accessing your Facebook account.

Lesson 13
Trusted Browsers

This is where you find a list of saved (trusted) web brows-
ers you used to access your Facebook account. You can
choose to remove a browser from the list if you don’t use
it anymore, let’s say you left your work place and of
course, you don’t use the browser in that location any-
more.

Where You’re Logged In

This is where you can review your logged-in status and
End Activity (terminate the session) on places and devic-
es you don’t recognize.

Deactivate your account

From this place, you can choose to deactivate the Face-
book account. This is useful if you know that you won’t
be able to access, or you simply don’t want to access, the
Facebook account for a period of time. You can reactivate
the account at any time.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 217

Privacy Settings

Lesson 13 The next section you need to access to improve your
overall security is the Privacy Settings area. The settings
from this location are meant to help you review basic
privacy settings and make sure your profile and the con-
tent you shared are viewed by the audience you select.

Who can see my stuff?

Select the audience for your posts. You can choose:

Public
Friends
Friends with Acquaintances
Only Me
or you can create a Custom audience

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 218

I recommend you to set the default sharing option to
Friends.

Lesson 13
In the same location, you can review your posts and your
Facebook activity by using the Activity Log, or limit the
audience for your posts in the past.

Who can contact me?

Set who can send you friend requests. If you want to be
located by people you used to know in the past, you need
to set this to Everyone.

Who can look me up?

In this place, you can choose if you want to be looked up
by people using your email address or your phone
number. At the same time, you can select if you want
search engines to send someone looking for your name
to your Facebook timeline.

This is an important privacy setting that you should con-
sider, since your Facebook timeline will appear in search
engine results if someone searches for your name.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 219

Timeline and Tagging Settings

Lesson 13 This place allows you to set other privacy settings for
your Facebook account. You can choose who can add
things to your timeline, who can see posts you share on
your timeline and how to manage tagging options.

Who can add things to my timeline?

This one is pretty straight forward. You can choose to
allow friends posting on your timeline and review a post
you are tagged in, before it appears online.

Who can see things on my timeline?

Use this option to check what other people have access
to on your timeline. You can select a single person and

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 220

view how he or she views your timeline. You can also
select who can see posts you have been tagged in on

Lesson 13 your timeline and choose who can see what others post
on your timeline. In the last two cases, you should set
these options to Friends.

How can I manage tags people add and tagging sugges-
tions?

Turning on this option, you will be able to check the tags
friends add to your photos before they appear. It is an
important privacy option because if someone adds a tag
to one of your posts, his/her entire list of friends will see
your specific post.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 221

Blocking

Lesson 13 In the Blocking tab you can restrict the way in which
other Facebook users, Facebook applications or pages
interact with you.

Restricted List

This list is useful when you want to restrict a friend from
seeing the posts you share on your timeline for other
friends. Nevertheless, that person can still see content
you make public.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 222

Block users

Lesson 13 Users you add to this list cannot see your Facebook pro-
file, send you invitations, add you as a friend or start a
conversation with you. Use this option to add a friend
whose account has been hacked. In the same Blocking
tab, you have the option to block app invites or event
invites from someone, block apps and Facebook pages.

Mobile

This is probably one of the most important security set-
tings you can set to your Facebook profile.

To enable Login Approvals, you need to enter a mobile
phone number here. In case your browser is not recog-
nized, you will receive a code via text message to log in to
your Facebook account.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 223

Apps

Lesson 13 Most of us use third party applications on Facebook,
applications which usually ask permission to access our
content and private data.

In this location you can see exactly what each third party
app has access to and you can choose to remove it from
the list, in case you don’t use it anymore or you have dis-
covered you are dealing with a suspicious app.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 224

Ads

Lesson 13

Do you want to allow third party sites access to your per-
sonal information?

Do you want Facebook telling your friends what you like?
If you want to opt-out from these two options, simply
select No one to these two options.

The third option, Ads based on your use of websites or
apps off Facebook, let’s you opt out of ads that are se-
lected for you by Facebook, based on your behavior on a
particular website. We all searched for a hotel on a web-
site and we were amazed to see on our Facebook page
an ad for that hotel.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 225

10 tips and tricks for increasing your Facebook security

Lesson 13 1. Don’t accept friend requests from unknown people. One
of the favorite methods used by online scammers to col-
lect private data and sensitive information from users is
by creating fake Facebook profiles. Make sure you and
your children pay attention to this possible privacy threat.

2. Do not disclose your personal details and your Facebook
credentials (email address, phone number and password)
to other users. This information can be used by cy-
ber-criminals to access your personal data.

3. Keep your browser up-to-date with the latest available
patches. Your browser and other software on your
system, not to forget the operating system, should have
the latest patches installed. Stay safe and don’t expose
your system to cyber-criminal attacks.

4. Use a good security program. You need to rely on a good
security software, which includes a real-time scanning
engine. This means that files you download from online
locations are analyzed in a very short period of time.

5. Stay safe from phishing attacks. Pay attention to the
various messages you receive from unknown users,
which ask for your personal data.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 226

6. Don’t use the same password from your Facebook ac-
count to other online accounts. If you use the same pass-

Lesson 13 word in other locations as well, you are vulnerable to a
potential hacker attempt that tries to get access to all
your accounts.

7. Activate Login Approvals. Though I have already men-
tioned this step before, I need to emphasize again its
importance.

8. Be careful when connecting to free wireless networks
from public spaces. Online criminals use these types of
unprotected networks to access users’ credentials and
steal sensitive data. To limit your exposure, you can use a
private browsing session.

9. Don’t click that link! Since social media and in this case,
our Facebook profile, is used for spreading and sharing
various content, it is also one of the favorite means of
carrying malicious links across the Internet.

10. Log out of your Facebook account. This piece of advice is
useful when using a public or work computer, which is
used by multiple individuals.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 227

Protect your Twitter Account in 10 Steps
Lesson 13 Twitter is one of those popular social media platforms

used not only by private individuals, but by large busi-
nesses and important names in the IT industry.

Due to its short writing style, it has been related to jour-
nalism and even used as a favorite news spreading tool
for revolutions and revolts around the world.
To stay safe from malicious attacks targeting social
media accounts and prevent online criminals from retriev-
ing private data from us, you need to follow additional
steps to keep your Twitter account secure:

1. Create and use a strong password

Yes, I know, it is easy to remember and use a password in
multiple online accounts. Maybe using something famil-
iar like your family name or your birthday date seems to
be a good idea. But isn’t this exactly the same thing
online criminals count on?

To make sure your account is safe from online intrusions,
it’s key to create a strong password which includes upper
and lower case characters, numbers and symbols, and is
over 10 characters long. This way it will be difficult for
cyber-criminals to access your Twitter account.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 228

At the same time, don’t use the same password in more
than one online account. The reason is easy to guess: if

Lesson 13 one of your online accounts is hacked, the others will
soon follow. By using different passwords, you reduce the
potential loss in case your Twitter account is accessed.

2. Use login verification

Login verification is a security option which helps you
protect your Twitter account.

It is a form of two-factor authentication, where you’ll be
asked to provide a phone number and an email address
before you connect to your online account.
This login verification adds a second check, where you
have the following 3 options:

enter a verification code sent to your phone’s Twitter app
enter a text message sent to your phone number
enter a photo of a backup code saved on your phone from
when you first enrolled in login verification

To activate Login verification, follow these steps:

1. Access your Twitter account.
2. Go to the top right corner and click your user image.
3. Choose Settings from the drop down list.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 229

4. Click Security and privacy in the left menu.
5. Select the corresponding option.

Lesson 13

3. Don’t post private information and do not disclose your
location

Don’t let online criminals know where you are and what
you’re doing. By default, Twitter is a public network and
anyone and see your tweets and can follow you.

If you want to control other people’s follow requests or
you want to share your tweets only with your followers,
you can make the necessary modification in the Security
and privacy area and check Protect my Tweets under the
Privacy section.

At the same time, make sure you don’t offer valuable

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 230

information to cyber-criminals, such as your location.
This kind of data becomes very important for a hacker

Lesson 13 who wants access to your private files or needs to create
a persona for you, in order to proceed to identity theft
attacks.

To protect your tweets and disable tweets location, follow
these steps:

1. Access your Twitter account.
2. Go to the top right corner and click your user image.
3. Choose Settings from the drop down list.
4. Click Security and privacy in the left menu.
5. Select the corresponding options.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 231

4. Stay safe from phishing attempts

Lesson 13 Phishing attempts on Twitter usually start with a direct
message you receive from an unknown person who tries
to retrieve your Twitter credentials for spamming purpos-
es.

It is a classic phishing attack through which they try to
trick you into giving away personal information or private
data.

This type of message will provide a link, which sends you
to a malicious login page. Don’t reply to this type of email
or click the provided link.
At the same time, many of us had that Twitter friend
which sent an unusual direct message to all his follow-
ers. In this case, that particular account has been
hijacked and you should not reply or click any link that it
may contain.

5. Use a specialized security solution against spyware
threats

Even if you pay attention to phishing attempts and spam
campaigns, you still need to keep yourself secured with a
safety net. I am talking about a specialized security solu-
tion against spyware threats.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 232

To keep your system secured against spyware, use one of
the popular anti-spyware products available online. A few

Lesson 13 security solutions capable of removing spyware from
your system are Malwarebytes, Spybot Search and De-
stroy, Lavasoft’s Ad-Aware, etc.

6. Check what apps can access your Twitter account

Another important way to protect your account is to be
cautious when giving access to third-party apps — these
services can gain full control of our account.

To make sure your Twitter account is not vulnerable, do
not give access to untrusted third party apps. When you
give your account credentials to an app, they have com-
plete control and they can take actions which may cause
your account to be suspended.

Pay extra attention to apps that promise money or a big
number of followers. When in doubt, simply search the
Internet for that app’s name before you provide access.

To check permissions apps have to your Twitter account,
follow these steps:

1. Access your Twitter account.
2. Go to the top right corner and click your user image.
3. Choose Settings from the drop down list.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 233

4. Click Apps in the left menu.
5. Take the necessary steps to allow or revoke access.

Lesson 13

7. Make sure you keep your vulnerable apps up-to-date

Security news on software vulnerabilities have appeared
lately all over the important security blogs and related IT
channels in the industry.
These threats cannot be ignored. Cyber-criminals use
software vulnerabilities in our systems and mobile
phones apps to take advantage of our private data and
use it in identity theft attacks.

Therefore, keeping popular software like Java, Adobe

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 234

Flash, Adobe Shockwave, Adobe Acrobat Reader, Quick-
time up to date is important, but

Lesson 13 paying attention to our mobile phones apps is also im-
portant and you should always make sure you have the
latest updates installed.

8. Use a Virtual Private Network to Hide Your IP Address

One of the favorite methods used by cyber-criminals to
steal credentials is to employ wireless sniffers to retrieve
data sent over unsecured networks.

To safeguard your social media accounts and protect
your online activities, you can use a VPN, that is a Virtual
Private Network.

Using a VPN means that you hide your IP address, en-
crypt your connection and access various web locations
in a private environment. This method keeps your sensi-
tive data from cyber-crime, identity theft and phishing
attempts. Stay safe online especially when using wireless
networks by using a popular VPN like CyberGhost.

9. Secure your browsing habits

Choose your web browser with care and make sure you
have made the necessary changes to improve your secu-
rity and privacy. Vulnerabilities in web browsers are like

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 235

open doors to hackers, who try to retrieve private data
from our systems and from our social media accounts.

Lesson 13
To secure our online privacy, follow these guidelines:

Secure your web browser from online criminals’ attacks
by choosing the latest version for your browser and
installing the latest security patches.
Read this Ultimate Guide to Secure your online browsing
and increase your online security
If you access your social media account from an unsafe
location, choose a private browsing session in order to
remove the browsing history details.

10. Don’t forget to log out from your Twitter account

This security step should be followed if you connect to
your account on a public computer. Though you may be
used to closing the web browser as soon as you are done
with your activity, you should remember to log out from
your accounts when you finish your online sessions.

If you don’t do this, especially if you are in a public loca-
tion, the next person who opens the Twitter account, for
example, will access directly our online profile.

Private browsing sessions are also recommended if you
want to prevent authentication credentials (or cookies)

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 236

from being stored.

Lesson 13 Protect your LinkedIn Account in 10 Steps

Social media is not all about having fun. Or starting a
revolution for that matter.
You may go for Twitter if you want to find out the latest
news and choose Facebook to stay up-to-date with your
friends’ latest interests.

But when you turn to your LinkedIn account, you need to
keep things serious and professional. And this is even
more important than on the other less “serious” chan-
nels.

LinkedIn can become our vulnerability when dealing with
online criminals, since there is more private information
shared publicly than on other popular social media ac-
counts. You simply expose and reveal more about our-
selves than on our Facebook profile.

Therefore, make sure you follow these 10 steps in order to
increase your security when using your LinkedIn online
account:


1. Check your current connections to LinkedIn

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 237

Lesson 13

This option is very useful because it allows you to see
which devices you have connected to your LinkedIn ac-
count and which sessions are still opened.

This LinkedIn feature can help you if you know you have
connected to your LinkedIn account from a publicly
shared computer or from a computer in a place you have
recently left.

In case you notice you are connected to your online ac-
count from an unknown device, choose the option to sign
out as soon as possible from that device.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 238

It may be a cyber-criminal trying to retrieve sensitive
data from your account and using this private information

Lesson 13 later on against you in an identity theft attempt.


2. Request an archive of your data

Using this option, you can request LinkedIn to send you
an archive of your account data.

It is an important step for your online privacy allowing
you to see not only what information you made available
online for others, but IP records of your past login con-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 239

nections, recent searches and other details.

Lesson 13 3. Who do you connect to?

Connect only to people you know and trust. Adding to
your list of connections unknown people, or people you
don’t actually know very well, increases the risk of adding
online criminals who only want to use your personal infor-
mation.
Using this professional data, which can be combined with
personal information from social media accounts, like
Facebook, cyber-criminals attempt to put all this data
together before they run an identity theft operation.

Before you know, your online banking accounts’ creden-
tials have been guessed and your money removed with-
out any notice.

We have dedicated lesson 4 to this topic.

4. Let’s keep it private: protect your sensitive information

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 240

Lesson 13

Online security is connected to privacy. As I mentioned
above, private information may be used against you if it
comes in the wrong hands. Therefore, you need to pay
attention to what you share with others, especially with
unknown people you have given access to your LinkedIn
profile.

Use the following options to increase your privacy online:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 241

Turn on/off your activity broadcasts: If you want to hide
from your connections the changes you choose to do on

Lesson 13 your profile, who you follow or when you make recom-
mendations, choose to uncheck this option.

Select who can see your activity feed: To hide your ac-
tions on LinkedIn or let only some connections see your
actions, select from the drop-down menu: Everyone, Your
network, Your connections or Only you.

Select what others see when you’ve viewed their profile:
You don’t want your connections see that you accessed
their LinkedIn profile? Choose to go anonymous using
this option.

Select who can see your connections: You don’t want to
share your list of connections with the others in the list?
Use this option to change it to Only you.

Edit your public profile: How do other people see you? Did
you know you can control your public profile and how you
appear on search engines? This is the place where you
can make the necessary modifications and what informa-
tion you choose to make visible online, like your current
or past work places, your skills or your education. Choose
wisely.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 242

5. Enable Two-Step Verification to block cyber-criminals
from accessing your online account

Lesson 13

First of all, I need to say that this security measure
should be enabled and used for any online account you
have, where this option is available. Some of the most
popular online accounts allow activating this security
step, for example Google, Facebook, yahoo Mail or Drop-
box, to name a few.

But what exactly is Two-Step Verification for LinkedIn?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 243

This security option is a form of verification that can be
used against identity theft and unauthorized access to

Lesson 13 your LinkedIn online account.

Activating Two-Step Verification requires that you insert a
security code sent to your phone every time you connect
from an unknown device. Since most cyber-criminal
attacks and identity theft attempts occur from unknown
devices, I strongly recommend using this security option.


6. Secure your connection with HTTPS option

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 244

Using the same location in the LinkedIn security settings
where you enabled Two-Step Verification, you have the

Lesson 13 option to activate the secure browsing mode.

This security option should be used as an extra protec-
tion step against unauthorized access to your browsing
sessions and to make sure you are actually connected to
your real LinkedIn account.

Most of all, I recommend activating and using this secure
browsing option if you access LinkedIn regularly from
unsafe or public locations, such as Wi-Fi networks in
cafes, airports or hotels. These places are usually favor-
ite locations for online criminals to access and retrieve
your online accounts’ credentials for banking websites
and other online accounts.


7. Don’t forget to sign out of your online account

This is something I highly recommend, especially after
using a publicly shared computer or an unsafe Wi-Fi net-
work. We tend to think that closing the web browser as
soon as we are done with our online activity is enough,
but you should remember to log out every time you finish
your online connection.

If you forget to do this, especially if you are in a public
space, any person accessing the browser may be sent

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 245

directly to your online profile.

Lesson 13 At the same time, if you really need to use a computer
from a public location and you are not sure about its se-
curity settings, I recommend using a “private browsing”
session, which prevents your browsing session history
and credentials from being preserved.


8. Keep your software up to date

Software vulnerabilities seem to increase each day. Now,
they have become one of the main tools used by online
criminals to take advantage of our systems.

By not keeping our Windows operating system and our
programs up-to-date, you allow online criminals to use
these security gaps and gain access to your programs
and applications. It is a quite well known fact that vulner-
able software applications like Java, Adobe Flash, Adobe
Shockwave, Adobe Acrobat Reader, Quicktime are on
most people’s computers and are widely used.

Few people in return actually acknowledge these solu-
tions are under threat from cyber-criminals and they
should use a dedicated solution to keep them up-to-date.


9. Set a Strong Password for your LinkedIn account

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 246

You may notice by now that I recommend more than any-
thing setting a strong password, if you have an online

Lesson 13 account. So, the same advice is valid here.

Here are a few simple steps you can follow:

Use different passwords for different online accounts. In
case one of your online accounts is accessed by an IT
criminal, at least you know that the other online accounts
won’t follow.
Make sure your password has over 10 characters.
Don’t forget to use capital letters, numbers and symbols.
Use a special program to keep your passwords, like Last-
Pass.

Remember lesson 4, when we helped you make your pass-
words hacker-proof?


10. Watch out for phishing messages requesting personal or
sensitive information

Phishing is an old tactic used by IT criminals who try to
steal your sensitive information and your financial data.
For this reason, you should keep an eye, not only on email
messages, but also on messages received via your Linke-
dIn account.

For this reason, always look closely at the received email

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Share. Tweet. Protect. Repeat. - social media, the safe way 247

before you open any attachment or click any link in the
message. Do you know the sender or the company who

Lesson 13 send the message? If you are not sure about their identi-
ty, look them up online for more information.

Do they ask you to download and install an application?
This is not a good sign of trusting that message. And is
there a link you need to follow? Check the link before you
click it. Simply hover the mouse over the link to see if it
sends you in a legitimate location. To make sure you are
going in a good direction, check the suspicious links
using a reliable URL checker, such as VirusTotal.

I know it was a long guide to follow, but you can access
and use only the necessary steps for your favorite social
media platform.

I know it’s hard not to click that link, like or share your
friends’ photos or stop your mother for liking your every
photo! But while you have fun online on these networks,
inventing or reinventing our lives, you must not forget
about security.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 14  /19

“Nobody
understands
the cloud!” - is
that you? How
to keep your
cloud-stored
data safe



CSB  -  “Nobody understands the cloud!” - is that you? 249
 How to keep your cloud-stored data safe

In today’s tech-dominated environment, we keep trying to find soft-
ware that will make us more productive, more creative, more organized

Lesson 14 and, especially, more relaxed.

So we try a lot of new services, because they seem interesting,
because they promise us we’ll have more time to spend doing the
things we love.

The problem is that we rarely think of the security implications every
new app we begin using brings to our lives. And to think it used to be
so simple…

Do you remember how your personal IT “infrastructure” used to look like
7-8 years ago?

Just like me, you probably had a desktop computer or had just bought
your first laptop, which relied on a dial-up connection or on a really
poor DSL one. Smartphones were practically dinosaurs compared to
what we use today!

But progress is not only necessary for our evolution, but it’s also excit-
ing! Today, our personal IT micro-universe looks more like a piece of
corporate infrastructure, with tenths of services relying upon each
other to handle our data and make it accessible everywhere.

I wonder if you were as skeptical as me when you first hear about “the
cloud”.

Remember this scene from the movie “Sex Tape”?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  “Nobody understands the cloud!” - is that you? 250
 How to keep your cloud-stored data safe

Lesson 14

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ecZL4Q2EVuY

That’s how I used to feel about services like Dropbox, Google Drive and
so on. But since then I’ve learnt a few tips & tricks to keep my
cloud-stored data safe, and today I want to share them with you!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  “Nobody understands the cloud!” - is that you? 251
 How to keep your cloud-stored data safe

The unique security challenges of cloud
computing

Lesson 14

I bet you don’t want to be one of those people who says
that “nobody understands the cloud!” So here are some of
the dangers that threaten your cloud-stored data:

Unauthorized access,
Data loss and data leakage,
Loss of control and many more cyber security risks can
be listed.

And there are various ways in which cyber criminals can
break into your cloud apps or services, to list a few:

By breaking your password.
By using an insecure API (APIs are the building blocks
used for building software). For example, if you have your
Facebook account connected to Dropbox, so it can auto-
matically save the picture you post, if your Facebook ac-
count gets compromised, the same will happen to your
Dropbox account.
Cloud apps usually plug into one another, so if one ac-
count gets compromised, so do all of the others who are
connected to it.  Just look at some of the many integra-
tion options that Dropbox offers:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  “Nobody understands the cloud!” - is that you? 252
 How to keep your cloud-stored data safe

Lesson 14

By persuading you into uploading a malicious file to your
cloud account, which could provide the cyber criminal
with the tools he needs to gain control over your cloud
account and delete everything that’s in there. Yes, that
could also include your back-up.

By using access to your data to leak it to third parties.
For example, if you share a folder with someone, and that
person has malicious intentions, he/she could use the
occasion to leak your data to cyber criminals. Or if that
person’s account gets compromised, your account could
suffer the same fate.

Should I give up using cloud apps?

Definitely not! You just have to ensure adequate protec-
tion.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  “Nobody understands the cloud!” - is that you? 253
 How to keep your cloud-stored data safe

8 GOLDEN RULES TO PROTECT YOUR CLOUD AC-
COUNTS

Lesson 14
1. Learn how to create strong passwords and how to safely

manage them, so you’ll never have to worry that a cyber
criminal can barge right into your accounts. Oh, and don’t
EVER store a list of passwords in a text file, in your cloud
account! Waaay back in lesson 4 I put together a pass-
word security guide that is always useful to revisit.

2. Keep it clean and simple: do a general check-up of your
cloud accounts, and see what services depend upon an-
other. If you haven’t used that specific dependency in the
last 2 months, it’s probably time to revoke access for that
app to your cloud account.

3. Beware of social engineering and its consequences.

4. Use next-generation anti-hacking tools along with your
antivirus solution (which is not quite enough nowadays).
If you go back to lesson 6 you’ll find out more about the
crucial role that these tools play in your cyber protection
system.

5. Sharing is caring – when you do it safely. See who are
the people who have access to documents stored in your
cloud account and take the necessary actions: revoke
access where no longer needed and limit access to “read

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  “Nobody understands the cloud!” - is that you? 254
 How to keep your cloud-stored data safe

only” where possible. You should refrain from offering
administrator privileges to anyone, even if you trust them.

Lesson 14 If their account gets compromised, yours can become
liable as well.

6. Back-up your data in several places (a cloud account + an
external drive). It’s always a good idea to keep multiple
back-ups of your data, in case anything should happen to
one of them. Go back to lesson 8 for a full, easy to apply
guide on data back-ups.

7. Encrypt your data! It may sound like encryption is only for
hardcore security fans, but that’s just a misconception.
Encryption has many benefits and we dedicated lesson
10 to a dedicated encryption guide that you can apply to
protect your data.

8. Strengthen your Wi-fi security. Do you use a Wi-fi con-
nection most of the time? When you’re at work, you’ll
most likely connect to a secured hotspot, but you should
take additional precautions at home as well. And if youre
tempted to use a public Wi-fi hotspot, then it could come
in handy to go over lesson 11 again for valuable tips 7
tricks!

When it comes to security, remember that it all works
together: technology depends on the human factor to
make it work, but it can also be compromised by the

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  “Nobody understands the cloud!” - is that you? 255
How to keep your cloud-stored data safe

same thing.

Lesson 14 Dependencies are essential when you think about how all
the services we use work together, so be careful how
much access you give to apps into your private informa-
tion.

Coming up in the next lesson (number 15):

Do you know where your data is?

We’ll teach you all about blocking identity theft attempts
like a Pro! Take that, cyber criminals!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 15  /19

Where is your
data? Block
identity theft
attempts like a
Pro



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 257

I am sure this won’t come as a surprise for you or anyone else:

Lesson 15 Malicious software and cybercriminal tricks ARE REAL and affect us
all.

But the worst malware types that could hit us, like advanced pieces of
data stealing malware or ransomware threats, they usually stop at our
computers.

Identity theft is something much worse.

Identity theft happens when an individual (it may be a hacker or a
cybercriminal), steals your private information – usually financial data
– and assumes your identity, while running data stealing operations or
financial transactions in your name.

The reason why it’s so difficult to protect yourself from this is because
most times you find out too late, when police arrives at your door
holding you responsible for various financial crimes developed in your
name.

Therefore, you are not dealing with a simple crime, but with an
advanced scheme that targets your valuable financial details and your
personal information.

In case you are affected by identity theft, contact police as soon as
possible.

But, as they say, it’s better safe than sorry, so make sure you follow the
steps below to protect from online and physical threats.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 258

Fend off cyber threats like a PRO!
Lesson 15 1. Choose a good strong password for your online accounts

This step is a classical one, but it cannot be avoided.
Passwords are only as good as the encrypting programs
that are used to protect valuable information.
Just remember to make sure your passwords incorporate
uppercase and lowercase letters and numbers, and are
more than 15 characters long.

Credentials for online accounts should not be easy to
access by a potential hacker, so it is recommended to
use a password manager as LastPass.

Remember lesson 4? I won’t go anymore in details.


2. Protect your computer with multiple security products

Identity thieves use multiple tools to get to your personal
data. I am not talking about the classical viruses here, I
refer to advanced malware and spyware tools that are
capable to retrieve sensitive information from a system
without the user’s knowledge.

These advanced pieces of malware are designed to evade
the normal antivirus detection and sometimes a long

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 259

time passes until the user becomes aware of their pres-
ence.

Lesson 15
Do you remember lessons 5 and 6 where we talked about
antivirus products and additional security protection?


3. Are you using a specialized security solution against finan-

cial and data stealing malware?

Traditional security solutions may not be able to fight
advanced pieces of code developed by cyber-criminal
minds.

To ensure financial security for banking operations and
protection against Zero Day malware, you need an ad-
vanced scanning technology that can protect you from
the latest threats.

4. Are you keeping your operating system safe from spyware?

Do you really want pop-up windows, malicious locations
and spyware tools all over your system?
To stay safe from spyware, use one of the popular an-
ti-spyware products available online. A few security solu-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 260

tions capable of removing spyware from your system are
Malwarebytes, Spybot Search and Destroy, Lavasoft’s

Lesson 15 Ad-Aware, etc.


5. Could you spot an online phishing scam if it targeted you?

How to prevent identity theft from online criminals that
target sensitive information and use various tools and
methods has always been a difficult task to accomplish.
Using all sorts of weapons, from traditional attack vec-
tors to phishing scams, these individuals seem impossi-
ble to catch.

The main phishing schemes and campaigns appear
when:

you shop online
you check our email account
access social media networks

As you can see, your online presence and activity is tar-
geted by cybercriminals because their main target is
YOUR MONEY.

Though phishing schemes use multiple channels and
methods to retrieve our sensitive credentials and attempt
identity theft, the email spam campaign is still the

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 261

number one method used to target user’s credentials and
steal identity details.

Lesson 15 Therefore, make sure you don’t answer unwanted mail
from unknown sources and keep your antivirus real-time
protection enabled, in case you access such an email or
its content.


6. Do you shop online?

Of course you do! And I bet you love it too!

But do you know how to detect a fake website that wants to
steal your money?
Follow these steps and make sure you don’t send your
financial details to cybercriminals:

Do you know the website you’re shopping from? Is it the first
time you’re using it? How did you discover the site?

Did you check the security symbols or any sign of legitimacy
on the website, like the lock icon encryption? At the same
time, check the address starts with “https://“. The “S” is
from “secure socket layer” and you know you are going to
a site where communication is encrypted. If you don’t
want checking all the time the web address, use HTTPS
Everywhere. This extension has the role to encrypt your
communications with many major websites, making your

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 262

browsing more secure and safe from online criminals.

Lesson 15 Are you unsure about a website? Why don’t you check it out
on search engines or on the Trustpilot site?

If you purchase online often and from different locations,
I recommend that you use a secondary card for online
shopping. In case something bad happens, you still have
the “good card“, which is usually the one you are using to
receive the monthly salary or run important transactions
on safe websites.

7. Don’t post confidential information online

What you publish online stays there for a long period of
time and it’s available for everyone to see. So, pay atten-
tion to personal data you place in comments, posts or the
pictures you display on your social media networks.

Even more, you need to teach your children or your par-
ents that online actions have real consequences and
using credit cards on any website poses serious privacy
risks that could lead cybercriminals to launch identity
theft operations.


8. Keep your system and software up-to-date

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 263

Keep your system up-to-date with the latest security
patches available. The same thing you should do for your

Lesson 15 vulnerable applications and programs.

Patches for a program or application are delivered by the
vendors to cover any security hole that may appear in a
software program, like Java, Adobe Flash or the popular
web browsers.

If you don’t want to bother checking and keeping the vul-
nerable applications up-to-date every day, I recommend
using a free dedicated solution to do the job.


9. Secure your browser settings

Our browser is the tool we use to connect to most web-
sites that we are interested in and to the online places
where we run financial transactions.
For this reason, an important degree of attention needs
to be given to our web browser, and the following guide-
lines should be followed:

Are you using the latest version for your browser? Make
sure you have the last browser version that contains all
the available security patches.

Improve your browser’s security settings.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 264

Use a private browsing session if you connect from a
public computer. You don’t want your browsing history

Lesson 15 details to be recorded locally. To hide your online connec-
tion, go online and search for a free proxy server. Use the
proxy to connect to any website and make sure your IP
address has been hidden from any online surveillance
mechanism.

To bulletproof your online activity and hide all the import-
ant financial and personal details from any type of sur-
veillance, you can encrypt your online connection by
using a VPN software or Tor browser that hides your
browsing activity by routing your traffic through the Tor
network of computers.


10. How much do you share on Facebook?

There is no discussion that social media has become an
important part of our lives. Nowadays every friend, work
colleague or family member has a Facebook account.

It is the place where you can find almost any individual
and this leads to an increasing danger for your personal
information, since in this common space the distinction
between public and private is blurred and what is private
data becomes public knowledge.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 265

How much do you share?

Lesson 15
Physical Threats – what can you do about those?

The steps you can follow to remain hidden from identity
theft attempts suppose more than online protection. For
this reason, I will continue to present the measures that
protect your physical identity from theft attempts.

11. Who’s watching you?

You are in front of an ATM machine or at the local shop
and try to withdraw some money or just insert your PIN
to pay.

Did you consider hiding your personal identification num-
bers or your bank account details from a possible privacy
breach?

Before placing your sensitive data, look around and make
sure there’s no one looking suspicious or who stays too
close to see your information.

Even if you don’t see anyone around, there may still be
thieves that use special surveillance mechanisms or
simple binoculars to look from a distance. Another possi-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 266

bility is to use hidden cameras, so just to make sure you
are on the safe side, try to hide the numbers you insert.

Lesson 15
12. What do you carry with you?

So many times you go out for a walk or for a dinner in the
evening. Maybe you go to see a friend or just watch a
new movie at the cinema.

Do you really need to carry with you all the credit cards
and your official papers?

Before you leave your home, just think a bit if you need all
those things with you and take only the necessary. You
need to do this because in case you lose or forget them
somewhere, you limit the potential loss.

At the same time, these days many banks offer a second
authentication measure when paying online: you can set
a password or receive a final identification code on your
phone before you place the order.

If you really need to carry your valuable credit cards, your
ID or maybe your passport, where are you keeping them?
How do you carry them around?
To limit the potential loss, follow these steps:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 267

Don’t leave your bag unattended in a public place or place
it far from you. If a thief takes your bag, can you catch

Lesson 15 him in time? Should you?

Don’t leave your wallet or purse in a jacket just hanging
around. Don’t make things easy for the thief.

Imagine that your wallet or bag have been stolen. How
much did you lose? What are the actions you need to take
to retrieve your official papers? Do you have the bank
phone number to call for a potential block? Follow this
step especially when you are located in a remote place or
have left in a long travel.

Consider distraction elements for the thieves. Keep a fake
wallet or don’t place important things in the bag that can
be stolen. Keep the important stuff with you.


13. Destroy any documents or papers you don’t need any-
more

I am sure you keep important data in your home, like
information from past work places, medical records, cer-
tifications and diplomas from school and university,
maybe sensitive information if you run a business.
But, along this information you have the tendency to col-
lect various papers and pieces of information that you

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 268

don’t actually need anymore, like receipts or bank state-
ments.

Lesson 15
Though you may not need that data anymore, it doesn’t
mean that for someone else, it is not an important ele-
ment that might be used to reach valuable financial de-
tails we have hidden.


14. Protect your normal mail box

Just think like an identity thief.

You need to find personal information, especially finan-
cial details about someone. How do you do it? Where do
you start from?

We think the easiest way is to start with those areas that
are less protected, like the mail box. And now that you
know where they will attack, just think about it:

What type of information do you receive in the mail box? Do
you receive important documents from the bank, maybe the
next credit card? If you do, you need to contact the bank
and have them stop this type of correspondence. If you
have important stuff you need to collect from the bank,
just go to the bank.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 269

Do you receive invoices for every service in the house?
Maybe it doesn’t seem like too much data for you, but an

Lesson 15 identity thief can use this information to correlate it to
other sources in order to have an image on your financial
situation. Wouldn’t it be easier to receive the invoices by
email, since today most services providers offer this
option.

How well did you secure your mail box? If anyone can
access your mailbox and you know that vital information
is delivered there, probably you should get a high security
locking mailbox or a personal one in the post office.

15. Do you know who’s calling?

Yes, an identity thief may call you, posing as a bank agent
or official representative and ask for private details or
financial data.

How does the thief know what’s your bank? Remember the
previous points? Is it really that hard to obtain this informa-
tion?

They may look through your mail box, they may watch
you at the shop or at the ATM or they may even look
through your garbage. It is not difficult to discover this
piece of information.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 270

And don’t be fooled by the professional tone they use or
Lesson 15 the fact that you’re talking to a nice woman. This criminal

profession knows no limits. Therefore, do not provide
important information over the phone, unless you initiat-
ed the phone call and you really know who you’re talking
to.


16. Destroy your digital information

How many CDs and DVDs have you collected along the
years?
And sometimes, you have been forced to throw into
thrash a hard disk which didn’t seem to work anymore,
without thinking about the private data we have left there.

To understand how the information from an abandoned
disk can harm you, just think about all the photos, docu-
ments and private details you have left there.

Using special tools and software, a hacker who finds
such a disk can retrieve all that information easily and
use it against you.

To make sure that an insecure disposal of old disks
doesn’t become an opportunity for identity thieves, you
need to destroy that data.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 271

The following options are available:
Lesson 15

Overwrite the data a few times and make things a bit
more difficult for an identity thief.
Physically destroy that hard disk or that DVD. Smash it.
Crack it. Bust it to smithereens!
Did you know printers and photocopiers also have hard disk
built in? So, don’t just throw away that printer before
removing the hard disk first.


17. Protect your Social Security number

This is one of the most important steps you need to take
to protect your identity from thieves, since this piece of
information can be used in multiple situations.

Using your social security number an identity thief can
apply for a new credit card or open a bank account.

It can also be used to obtain access to ask for a loan or
rent a house. Or it can be used to prove your identity over
the phone or online in order to access private informa-
tion.

Here are a few techniques you can use to protect it:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 272

Don’t use it as a password on any online account.
Don’t just take it with you anywhere, unless you really

Lesson 15 need it.
Don’t send it over the email.
Don’t store it on your computer, your smartphone or your
cloud drive.

18. Keep your smartphone safe

How many things are you doing by using only your smart-
phone?

I am sure you already forgot those things are for calling
someone. We all use our smartphones to take pictures,
use various apps, have direct access to our cloud drive or
even run financial transactions.

And this becomes our greatest risk. Just think about the
amount of information one gets access to, just by having
access to our smartphone.

That’s why, I have to underline a few steps that need to be
followed in order to improve our smartphone’s data
doesn’t fall into the wrong hands:

Download apps from well-known companies, especially
apps that are used for financial transactions.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 273

Physically watch your smartphone and instruct your chil-
Lesson 15 dren on this too. Just by gaining access to your smart-

phone, an identity thief obtains a large amount of infor-
mation.

Secure the mobile device with a strong password or
better yet, use 2 methods to keep it sealed from any
breach.

Use the best apps available to protect your smartphone.
Most of them include a GPS feature and a remote wipe
out mechanism.


19. Check your bank account transactions every month

You think you know what purchases you have operated
that month, but sometimes cybercriminals find ways to
steal just a small amount of money in order to test your
attention.

There are so many cases where customers’ credit card
information has been “read” and used in restaurants and
stores, only to find out later about this, when it was
already too late.
A good idea is to activate on your bank account the
option to receive alerts for any sum of money that has

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 274

been retrieved.

Lesson 15 And make sure you know the bank’s policy on this type of
cases, so that you know what’s next if your card is under
attack.


20. Back it up

I don’t mean the computer back-up now, but the idea of
backing something up is to accept that a certain thing
may be lost at some moment.

Let’s try to answer a few questions so that we may solve
this problem:

Are you keeping all your money on one credit card? Why?
Just use at least 2 and split the money.

Do you carry both cards with you when you go out? Why?
Just take one or at least, don’t place them both in the
same place. Limit the potential loss.

Do you need to verify your identity somewhere? Ok, take an
identification paper or document with you, but don’t take
the ID, the driver license and the passport along.

And do you really need an official document with you?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Where is your data? Block identity theft attempts like a Pro 275

Maybe you can replace it with a photocopy. In any case,
make sure you always have photocopies for all the im-

Lesson 15 portant documents, especially when travelling.

Do you have a phone number where you can call for help in
case you lose an official paper or the credit card?

We did our best to cover any possible situation that may
appear, from online threats developed by cybercriminals
to physical threats that appear when you carry important
documents, like identification papers or your smart-
phone.

Once identity theft occurs, it is difficult to recover per-
sonal data or any piece of information cyber-criminals
have stolen. This happens because many times you don’t
know how and when it happened.

The idea behind all this is simple: Always be ready for
every possible situation.

It is better to prevent cyber-criminals from stealing bank-
ing details and personal information than take measures
when it may already be too late and your money have
been retrieved.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 16  /19

Are you under
attack?
Detect & block
cyber criminals
actions



CSB  -  Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber criminals actions 277

We talked about online security and how you can be safe from online
threats that affect us, but can YOU learn how to detect malware?

Lesson 16
With so many ways out there to access and exploit vulnerable sys-
tems, I want to make sure you are able to recognize a malware infec-
tion in order to defend your systems from malicious software and
cybercriminals.

For this reason, you need to find out how a malware infection appears,
so that you can correctly assess the risk and create an effective
defense strategy.

10 Warning Signs That Your Computer is Infected

1. Slowdown

It takes longer than normal for your operating system to
boot up? Are you waiting too long for some of your programs
to start?

We all know that malware has the tendency to slow down
your operating system, your Internet speed or the speed
of your applications.

If you notice something like this and you are not using
any resource-heavy program or application, check first
for other causes. It may be a lack of RAM memory, a frag-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber criminals actions 278

mented system and a lack of space on your hard drive or
maybe a hardware issue affecting your drive.

Lesson 16
If you have already verified these possible causes and all
seemed fine, maybe you should start suspecting a mal-
ware issue on the system.


2. Pop-ups

One of the most annoying signs of malware is represent-
ed by the unwanted pop-up windows. Unexpected
pop-ups that appear on the system are a typical sign of a
spyware infection.

In this particular case, the main issue is created not only
by the numerous pop-up windows that affect your Inter-
net navigation, but also because it is quite difficult to
remove them from the system. Pop-ups are not only an-
noying, but they usually come together with other mal-
ware threats which are concealed from your eyes, and
which could be far more destructive for your systems.

To avoid spyware and its negative consequences for our
systems, keep in mind a few security practices:

don’t click any suspicious pop-up windows
don’t answer to unexpected answers

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber criminals actions 279

be careful when downloading free applications

Lesson 16 To remove this type of threat, you need a very good secu-
rity product against spyware. A few popular products
capable of removing spyware from your system are Mal-
warebytes, Spybot Search and Destroy, Lavasoft’s
Ad-Aware and others.


3. Crashes

If your programs or your system regularly crash or the
infamous BSOD (Blue Screen of Death) appears regularly, it
is a clear warning that your system is not working proper-
ly and you should look into it.

I need to mention here the 2 particular cases which may
cause this problem:

1. You could be dealing with a technical issue caused by a
potential incompatibility between your programs or it
may be a malware issue. If you suspect a technical issue,
multiple software problems may lead to this. Are you run-
ning various programs which may conflict with each other?
Is there any orphan registry keys which have not been
removed slowing down and eventually crashing your
system?

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber criminals actions 280

2. If you are checking for malware, simply run a complete
scan on the system with a good antivirus product. It is

Lesson 16 important to have a reliable security solution on your
system, which should include real-time scanning, auto-
matic update and a firewall. Do you remember lesson 4,
where we talked about choosing a good antivirus product?


4. Suspicious Hard drive activity

Another warning sign of a potential malware infection on
your system is the hard drive activity. If you notice that
your disk continues to have excessive activity even when
you don’t use it anymore and there is no present program
or download running at that moment, this could be the
moment to check your system for malware.

I have to mention that another possible cause for the
abnormal hard disk activity could be a hardware failure of
the disk. This should also be taken into consideration.


5. Running out of hard drive space

Regarding the hard drive, you also need to check if your
physical storage space has been increasing lately or if
some of your files disappeared or changed their names.
This is another sign of malware activity, since there are
numerous types of malicious software which use various

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber criminals actions 281

methods to fill up all the available space in the hard drive.


Lesson 16 6. Unusual high network activity

There are cases where you may not be connected to the
Internet with your browser and there is no program that
may connect to online servers to download or upload any
data, but a high network activity can still be observed.

First of all, you need to check the following:

Is there any Windows update at that moment?
Is there any program or application that may be downloading
or uploading any data?
Is there any update for a certain program running at that
moment?
Is there a large download that you started and forgot about it
and is still running in the background?
If the answer to all these questions is No, then maybe you
should check where all that traffic is going.
To monitor your network, you can use one of the follow-
ing programs: GlassWire, Little Snitch or Wireshark.
To check for a malware infection, use a good antivirus
product to check your system.
If you suspect that your computer has been infected by a
dangerous financial malware, you need a specialized
software designed to address these type of threats.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber criminals actions 282

7. New Browser home page, new toolbars and/or your
browser opens unwanted websites

Lesson 16
Did you notice your home page has been changed and you
don’t seem to know why?
A new toolbar seems to be placed at top of your web brows-
er?
Have you tried to access your favorite blog, but you were
sent to a different address?

This usually happens when you visit a website and you
accidentally click an online link or a pop-up window. This
action triggers the download and install of a secondary
software, which is not only annoying, but also malicious.

What to do:

Run a complete scan with your security solution as soon
as possible. Because these type of threats don’t easily go
away, make sure you run additional scans with special-
ized software, such as anti-spyware programs mentioned
above.


8. Unusual messages or programs starting automatically

If, all of a sudden, you see programs opening and closing
automatically, your Windows operating system shutting

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber criminals actions 283

down without reason or you have strange windows in the
booting process and Windows lets you know that you lost

Lesson 16 access to some of your drives, this is something you
should worry about.

Though it may be a technical issue, it is also a sign that
malware could be present on the system. If this is the
case and you lost access to some important areas of
your operating system, you need to prepare for the worst.
These are the cases when a complete wipe and reinstall
of the operating system is taken into consideration.


9. Your security solution is disabled

Your antivirus solution doesn’t seem to work anymore or
the Update module seems to be disabled. You should
know that some malware programs are specially de-
signed to disable security programs, leaving you without
any defense.

If you already tried to reboot your computer, close and
open the security solution and all other normal trouble-
shooting steps resulted in no positive outcome, you may
consider that your computer has been affected by mal-
ware.

Though you may have prepared for the worst, comple-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber criminals actions 284

mented your online security by employing advanced an-
ti-spyware solutions and security programs specially

Lesson 16 designed to keep money safe, there are cases when a
powerful malware gets beyond our defenses and compro-
mises our security solution.


10. Your friends say they receive strange messages or emails
from you

Are your friends telling you that they received suspicious
emails from you or instant messages from your social media
account containing attachments or links?

First of all, you need to verify whether those emails or
messages were sent from one of your accounts (so
check your Sent Items folder in your email account) or if
those messages were delivered from an application
which is out of your control.

If you discover the messages were sent from one of your
accounts, make sure of the following:

Make sure you logged out from all your accounts. How
many times didn’t you access the same accounts on work
computers, home laptops and even mobile devices? Since
you logged in to your favorite online accounts on so
many mobile devices, it is quite possible that sometimes

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber criminals actions 285

you forgot to log out. Therefore, always make sure to log
out from your online accounts on all the devices.

Lesson 16
Set strong passwords for your accounts. Don’t forget to
combine upper and lowercase letters, numbers, and sym-
bols. Don’t use the same password for all your accounts.
Even if you are hacked, having different passwords for
each account will help you limit a potential loss. Make a
habit of changing your main passwords every 30 days.
Use a strong and secure password manager as LastPass.

Use two-factor authentication. Use this method to make
sure your online accounts or your email address are not
accessed by somebody else. Using this option means
that, besides entering your credentials, you will also need
to enter a code sent to your phone.

Remember this: knowledge is your best weapon.

Knowing how malicious software behaves on a regular
system may just prove to be the key element between
staying safe and having your system wrecked or your
online identity stolen.

Since we live in a threat environment, online security
means not only to install a series of security programs,
but understand how malware manifests itself on the

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Are you under attack? Detect & block cyber criminals actions 286

system and thus to know your enemy.

Lesson 16 In the end, don’t forget that it is far easier to prevent a
threat from becoming reality than to take actions against
it when it’s already too late.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 17  /19

What your kids
& parents need
to learn about
cyber security



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 288

Hi there,

Lesson 17 Today I want to help you protect some of the most important people in
your life: your children and your parents.

Kids and parents are some of the most vulnerable categories of online
users for one simple reason: none of them have the ability to under-
stand what might harm them online.

Their innocence about all things web makes us smile most of times,
but it could get them into trouble!

So let ME help YOU help THEM!

Teach your parents about online safety

Teach your kids how to use the web safely

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 289

5 Tips to Protect Your Parents from Cyber
Attacks

Lesson 17

1. Explain what information security is, in their own lan-
guage

You’re almost at the end of the course, so you’re well
equipped to pass on the information you’ve learnt to
others who might need it.

Make sure you help your parents understand the basic
notions of online security, before they go online.

Knowing how to download an attachment received in an
email is as important as knowing not to open an email
sent by a strange person.

When talking to your parents about cyber security:

Do your best to use examples and comparisons to real
life events to help them understand the impact of their
actions online.

Explain to your parents that their digital assets (bank
account, personal information, etc.) need as much pro-
tection as their physical ones (house, car, wallet, etc.),
except that, for the most part, they can’t insure their digi-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 290

tal belongings, so they should be extra careful with how
they handle the information.

Lesson 17
Ask them to be careful while they shop online and not to
be deceived by the notorious „you’re our 1000000 cus-
tomer!” banner scam and the like.

2. Show them how they could get compromised

I think you’ve experienced this as well with other things
you’ve read:

Examples are a great way to help information stick.

Take your parents through some examples of how they
could get infected online:

Show them how clicking a malicious ad could infect their
laptop;

Teach them about spam and how to organize their inbox;

Advise them not to download anything suspicious;

Warn them against installing new software on their com-
puter without consulting you first. For this last part I also
recommend installing Team Viewer. It will come in handy

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 291

if something goes awry and you need to see what the
situation is, so you can fix it.

Lesson 17
A simple example is to tell them about ransomware:

Advise them to read this story about how someone’s
mother became a victim of cyber criminals and paid over
$500 to rescue her data after her computer was infected
with CryptoWall.

That’s something they should remember!

3. Teach them to be vigilant

Be open and approachable about your parents’ questions
and never talk to them in a condescending manner.

It’s important for them to be vigilant online and to know
how to react to different triggers that cyber-criminals
might use (banners, links, spam, etc.).

Of course, remember to advise them against giving their
personal information for any forms or contents they may
come across online.

You don’t want to worry them too much, but enough to be
observant, while still enjoying Wikipedia, Facebook or

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 292

other websites.

Lesson 17 4. Indicate how simple safety features work

A good way to teach your parents about security features
on their laptop is to show them how to store their pass-
words in a safe place and to set up a password for their
computer.

When it comes to paying bills, show them what security
symbols they should be looking for (SSL, the padlock
symbol, etc.) when making a financial transaction.

Teach them what alerts to look for when if the antivirus
kicks in (you should install this right after the initial
setup) or for signs of malware infection.

Also, assure them that they can give you a call anytime
they have questions.

5. Install a silent patching tool

How many times have you received this call from your mom?

“Honey, there’s this box asking me to download an update
or something. And I don’t know how to close it. What do I
do?”

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 293

From my experience, there’s only one way to prevent this
type of calls from happening (I can’t say the same about

Lesson 17 other questions though :) )!

You need a tool that can patch the software on your par-
ents’ computer silently, without asking for permission or
filling the desktop with popups on start. Heimdal Free
can be an option you can consider.

Remember that antivirus is not enough to protect them
from sophisticated threats (go back to lesson 6 for more
details on next-generation anti-hacking tools).

Now let’s see how your juniors should learn, early on, how
to stay safe online. This, in turn, will help them become
responsible Internet users.

Internet Safety for Kids in 7 steps

1. Establish ground rules that define Internet access and
usage for your child

One of the most important talks you should have with
your child is about dos and don’ts while browsing the
web.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 294

Establish the limits that define how your kids can access
the web with care and patience.

Lesson 17
Here are some of the subjects you may want to include in
the discussion:

Personal information – what’s okay to share and what
isn’t
Screen name – how to choose one
Passwords – how to create and manage them (remember
lesson nr. 4?)
Photos – you kids should never post pictures online with-
out your approval
Online friends – remind them that not everything they
read online is true and teach them to ask for advice
before befriending someone unknown online
Online ads -  avoid clicking them and never buy anything
online without the parents’ permission
Downloading – it’s best to teach them to ask you before
downloading a new program/app/email attachment
Bullying – never respond to mean or insulting messages
and always ask for help from adults
Social networking – mind the age restrictions for social
networking sites and help your kids perceive them not as
limits, but rather as a layer of protection
Research – make a list of trusted resources your kids can
use and always be available for questions when they ask

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 295

for help.

Lesson 17 As part of these limits, negotiate how often it would be
okay to check what’s happening on your kids’ gadgets. It
doesn’t have to be daily, but once every few weeks, you
should take a look at:

Your kids’ browsing history
Their download history
The IM applications they use
Their email inbox
Other communication tools and platforms they might use
(chatrooms, forums, etc.).

This type of monitoring is only suitable for certain ages,
so that’s why it’s essential to start educating your chil-
dren on cyber security at a young age. As they grow
older, they will most likely reject all forms of monitoring,
especially during their teens.

Also, keep in mind that the limits we, as adults, impose
may increase our kids’ safety online, but at the same time
we risk blocking the natural development process that
drives our children forward.

Balance is key, as with many aspects regarding using the
web and its many resources.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 296

2. Teach your children about online dangers

Lesson 17 I can’t emphasize this enough:

Teaching your kids about the threats looming around the
web is crucial to help them enjoy the web safely and keep
your family protected.

Talk to your child/children and get them to sign off on a
mutual agreement that teaches them how to behave
responsibly on the web. Here’s an example you can use:

1.   I will not give out personal information such as my ad-
dress, telephone number, parents’ work address/telephone
number without my parents’ permission.

2.   I will tell my parents immediately if I come across some-
thing that makes me feel uncomfortable.

3.   I will not agree to get together with someone I “meet”
online without first talking to my parents and asking for per-
mission. If my parents agree to the meeting, I will make sure
that it’s in a public place and bring a parent along.

4.   I will always check with my parents about posting pic-
tures of myself or others online and I commit not to post any
pictures that my parents consider to be inappropriate.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 297

5.   I will not respond to any messages that are mean, offend-
ing or in any way make me feel uncomfortable. It is not my

Lesson 17 fault if I get a message like that. If I do, I will tell my parents
straight away.

6.   I will be responsible about the rules set about how and
when I use the computer and phone. Along with my parents,
we’ll decide upon the time of day that I can be online, how
long I can stay online and appropriate areas for me to visit. I
will not break these rules without their permission.

7.   I will not give out any of my passwords to anyone (even
my best friends) other than my parents.

8.   I will check with my parents before downloading or
installing software or doing anything that could possibly
hurt our computer or mobile device, or put my family’s priva-
cy at risk.

9.   I will be a responsible Internet user and never do any-
thing that hurts other people or is against the law.

10. I will help my parents understand things they don’t know
yet about the Internet and other technology, while having fun
together and making it a great experience.



www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 298

3. Install a good antivirus product on the computer

Lesson 17 Are your children using a separate computer from you?
Are you using the same computer?

It doesn’t really matter. Security is security and each
computer should be protected from online threats and
malicious software.

Since children are naturally attracted by new things and
have less experience, they easily follow dangerous links
and untrusted websites. Not to mention the tendency to
download and install video games from unknown web
locations, a content which could easily infect the entire
operating system.

Therefore, you need to have a good antivirus product
from a reliable company and this solution must include:

a real-time scanning engine,
a firewall
and automatic updates for crucial software.

To help you determine what the best AV solution for you
and your family is, I recommend using the guide we
shared during lesson 5 of this course.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 299

You’ll find everything you need to help you make a wise
decision in there.

Lesson 17
4. Use parental control software to monitor your child’s

online behavior

Software companies have already considered the possi-
ble issues that could appear from kids’ unrestricted
access to online content. For this reason, you’ll find many
parental control solutions that address and try to limit
this problem.

Should you use such a software or not?
How much do you trust your child’s intuition?
And how likely is it that your child will get involved in unsafe
activities that could compromise the operating system or
your financial situation?

Since parental control solutions have been in use for
quite some years now, you may find useful having a soft-
ware that acts like an online guardian.

Parent control solutions can help by:

monitoring Internet usage
keeping track of visited websites
controlling the Internet connection time

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 300

blocking malicious or porn websites
blocking games

Lesson 17 reporting any unusual online activities.

Here are some free options worth evaluating:

Romaco Timeout - https://romacocanada.ca/timeout/
Parental Tools - http://www.parentaltools.net/
DigiParent - http://digiparent.weebly.com/
+ 27 more options listed here:
http://listoffreeware.com/list-of-best-free-parental-con-
trol-software/
+ 6 more options listed here (including cell-phone moni-
toring apps):
http://www.tomsguide.com/us/best-parental-con-
trol-apps,review-2258.html

5. Keep your child’s software up-to-date

At the risk of sounding like a broken record, I’m going to
say this one more time:

Make sure the Windows operating system used by your
child has all the latest security patches installed. These
updates are important because they contain stability and
security fixes that shield the system against cyber-crimi-
nals attempts.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 301

Security experts have proved that hackers usually gain
access to operating systems by using security holes in

Lesson 17 software, like Adobe Flash, Java or popular browsers like
Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox and Google Chrome.

That’s why you need to check the PC used by your chil-
dren and make sure they have the necessary security
patches. To avoid this task which could take some time if
you have a few computers in the house, I recommend
using a free dedicated solution to do the job, such as
Heimdal FREE or Malwarebytes Anti-Exploit kit.

6. Don’t let them go online without anti-spyware protection.

As you already know, spyware is a software program that
monitors your private Internet connections without your
knowledge. But, as everybody knows, there are many
warning signs that could indicate that such an infection
is present in your system.

So, if you hear your child complaining about slow-down
issues, pop-ups all over the screen, new toolbars, a dif-
ferent default engine or random error messages, this
could mean a spyware issue that you need to address.

To stay safe from spyware, talk to your child and teach
him a few basic things to keep things clear:

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 302

don’t click suspicious links or pop-up windows
don’t answer to unexpected questions

Lesson 17 don’t involve in chat sessions with strangers
be careful about drive-by downloads in free applications.

Even better, use popular anti-spyware products available
online, like Malwarebytes or Spybot Search and Destroy.

7. Secure your Home Wireless network & stay safe on
public Wi-fi hotspots

The home Wi-Fi network is usually accessed only by
members of the same household, but that doesn’t mean
that it’s danger free. You should still work on keeping
things secure.

In lesson 11, we shared 2 essential guides for any Internet
user:

How to protect your Wi-fi connection at home  &
How to keep safe on public Wi-fi hotspots.

Make sure to go back on that lesson for step-by-step tips
& tricks and APPLY them.

The key to cyber security is ACTION, not just information!
It’s important to protect the home network and the com-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  What your kids & parents need to learn about cyber security 303

puters that are part of it, because a security breach on
one computer could compromise the entire network. And

Lesson 17 this is something you, as a parent, should be aware of.

So here’s a final checklist you can use that summarizes
this comprehensive lesson:

Tips to Protect Your Parents Internet Safety for Kids
from Cyber Attacks

Explain what information Establish ground rules that
security is, in their own define Internet access and
language usage for your child

Show them how they could Teach your children about
get compromised online dangers.

Teach them to be vigilant Install a good antivirus prod-
uct on the computer.

Indicate how simple safety
features work Use parental control soft-

ware to monitor your child’s
Install a silent patching tool online behavior.

Keep your child’s software
up-to-date.

Don’t let them go online
without anti-spyware protec-
tion.

Secure your Home Wireless
network.

That’s it for today. You’re almost at the end of the course,
so kudos for sticking with us so far!

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 18  /19

No-nonsense
cyber security:
10 things you
never knew
were necessary



CSB  -  No-nonsense cyber security: 10 things you never knew were necessary 305

Let’s start with a simple question:


Lesson 18 What is common sense and how do you define it?

And the most important question is:

How can you use common sense to keep you safe online from advanced
pieces of malware and cybercriminal masterminds?

Though security tools are not to be left aside, without deeper knowl-
edge and understanding of Internet security, going online is like driving
a car without a license.

Common sense is vital! So here are the 10 common sense guidelines
you need to be aware of before going online.

1. Copyright is important

The World Wide Web contains various types of content,
like music, images, text and so on, that may fall under
copyright rules.

Since the Internet content is easy to access, we have the
impression of a total online freedom. Nevertheless, there
are rules and laws that do not allow using someone’s
content without permission.

Have you used a text or an image in a certain context? Make

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No-nonsense cyber security: 10 things you never knew were necessary 306

sure you give credits to the owner. Usually, as long as you
admit and indicate the original owner and location, there

Lesson 18 should be no problem in using a specific piece of con-
tent.


2. Be careful when dealing with emails from unknown
sources

Have you received an email from an unknown source? Do
you frequently receive emails from people you don’t know?

First, don’t trust emails that come from people you never
met, especially those emails that ask you to take an
action.

It is not very difficult to spot this type of phishing emails
which demand immediate action and contain words like
“confirm now“, “take action now“, “discover now“, “pay
now”, etc.

To fool the potential victims, the latest trend in e-crime is
to deploy spear phishing attacks, where emails appear to
come from well-known individuals or banking authority.

How do they find out about your friends or companies you’re
usually dealing with? They simply launch an identity theft
operation to target and steal your sensitive information.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No-nonsense cyber security: 10 things you never knew were necessary 307

So, when you receive such an email, make sure you:

Lesson 18 don’t reply to the email
don’t click the (malicious) attachment
don’t click the dangerous links in the email that could
download malware on the system


3. Don’t click that link or online ad!

It is a link and you want to follow it, no matter it is in an
email or in a web page.

What could go wrong? The answer is simple: a lot of things
could go wrong.

Just by clicking a link in an email or a pop-up window,
you could connect and enroll your system into a botnet
network and have your computer used in online attacks
and malicious actions that target financial data and per-
sonal information.

You may think that you are safe from all these dangers
because you are using a good antivirus product, but
today traditional antivirus protection is not enough any-
more and you need additional weapons in the fight
against online dangers.


www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No-nonsense cyber security: 10 things you never knew were necessary 308

4. It’s a free program, so that’s good, right?

Lesson 18 Well, it depends on the program. Do you know that pro-
gram? Have you or others used it before? If you are not sure
about a software that you want to download and run on
your system, just google it!

You should find some information on that software or, in
case it is a malicious software, you should discover users
that complain or security programs that have been creat-
ed to remove that threat.

Another major danger posed by free programs is the ad-
ditional drive-by downloads that are installed without our
knowledge and bring on the system security exploits that
target our software vulnerabilities.

Make sure you use a program that automatically updates
your vulnerable software applications.


5. Do not reveal sensitive information online

It is not easy, especially today when everybody has a
social media account and it’s normal to simply go online
and comment, blog or share.

And among so much information we make public, we

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No-nonsense cyber security: 10 things you never knew were necessary 309

forget that personal names, contact details or private
interests are also displayed to unknown people.

Lesson 18
As I have already mentioned above, these are the ele-
ments that are used to deploy identity theft activities. So,
be a bit skeptical about people you meet online and
about their intentions. It is a well-known fact we all exag-
gerate our real lives on Facebook, but sometimes social
media dangers may create real issues for us if we add the
wrong people to our circle of friends.


6. Keep your credentials for yourself

Our credentials for online accounts, user names and
passwords, are probably the most important pieces of
information in the online environment.
For this reason, there is nothing more important than
keeping them safe from prying eyes and cybercriminals.

Remember: Even though you may have set a strong pass-
word, if you use it more than once and in more than one
online account, in the unfortunate case hackers discover
it, your other online accounts are in danger.

7. Report illegal activities or offending content

If you notice offending language attacks, like cyber-bully-

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No-nonsense cyber security: 10 things you never knew were necessary 310

ing, hate speech or any form of harassment, do not hesi-
tate to report it immediately to your parents, teachers or,

Lesson 18 if you are an adult, to the law enforcement officials.

It is much better to take action sooner than later, because
it all starts from a simple verbal attack that may develop
into something much bigger, especially for a child.

Though it may not happen to you, it doesn’t mean that a
friend or a family member won’t be affected by what you
choose to ignore.

8. What you post online stays online forever

We post photos, remarks, location updates and similar
content, which we think it is only seen by our close
friends.

But, from your 200 or 300 friends, how many of them do you
actually know?

And you may think that your posts and comments are
usually ignored or don’t receive much attention, but they
still remain there and you never know when they come
back at you. Not to mention the fact that search engines
save and classify your content on so many online serv-
ers.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No-nonsense cyber security: 10 things you never knew were necessary 311

To keep it short, follow a few simple guidelines:

Lesson 18 think twice before you publish or post it.
will you still support your content over the years?
could your content affect your personal or professional life
in the future?

Stay social, but stay safe. Do you remember lesson 12,
where we talked about social media protection?


9. Use antivirus protection before you go online

Don’t go online until you have the best antivirus protec-
tion that money can buy.
You may think that avoiding adult websites and that sort
of thing will keep you safe, but did you know that hackers
now hide malicious code even in legitimate websites?

And it’s getting worse! Even if you have a good antivirus
product, you may still get infected by advanced malware.
And in this case, you really need the best tools out there.

To find the best antivirus product, take a fast look at
lesson 4!

10. Create back-up copies for your important stuff

Though you may have all the security protection in the

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  No-nonsense cyber security: 10 things you never knew were necessary 312

world, disaster may still hit your system and your valuable
files.

Lesson 18
It may be a system crash, a hard disk failure, a ransom-
ware attack that encrypts your entire operating system or
it may be a human mistake.

There are so many reasons something may go wrong for
you and your sensitive information, even if you followed
all the common sense in the world.

So, save your data and don’t forget about the back-up
solutions in lesson 7!

There is a strong connection between common sense
and knowledge.

If you need to follow a set of security guidelines to stay
safe on the Internet, the same thing is valid for common
sense behavior in the online sphere. In the end, knowl-
edge and common sense become the two sides of the
same coin: Internet protection.

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



Cyber Security for Beginners

Lesson 19  /19

Cyber Security
Ninja level
achieved!



CSB  -  Cyber Security Ninja level achieved! 314

You know what makes you a rockstar?

Lesson 19 The fact that you’ve stuck with us for 18 lessons and now you’re down
to the last one!

You’ve gone from being a curious user to becoming a real CYBER
NINJA in terms of information security knowledge and that is FANTAS-
TIC! Both for you and for the ones that will benefit from your protection
and insights.

I hope that one of the main things you leave this course with is this:

The ability to navigate any web environment safely.

Knowledge may evolve and cyber threats will definitely do so, but after
“graduating” this course I know you will be able to spot vulnerabilities,
threats and malicious intentions and shield yourself from them.

So now it’s time to see how far you’ve come.

Remember the self-evaluation you did in the first lesson of the course?

We have another one prepared to show you how well you can now
protect yourself and others from cyber threats. (If you never got around
to filling the first evaluation, no worries – just go ahead with this one and
enjoy the results!)

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber Security Ninja level achieved! 315

How strong of a Cyber Ninja are you?
Lesson 19

TEST YOUR CYBER KNOWLEDGE NOW

Before you say goodbye, I want to give you that surprise I
promised in the beginning of this final lesson.

We put together a FREE EBOOK for you with 50+ security
tips & tricks from top experts in the industry!

And last, but not least,

as a BIG THANK YOU for choosing this course and invest-
ing your time and effort to enhancing your cyber security
skills,

It’s been a great learning experience for us as well putting
together this course for you!

I hope you’ll meet us on the Heimdal Security blog, where
we’ll keep building cyber security guides that can really
help you every time you go online.

And here’s one more reason to keep improving your Inter-
net security: we just launched The Daily Security Tip! It’s
a daily email with quick online safety tips you can apply

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



CSB  -  Cyber Security Ninja level achieved! 316

right away. I figured you didn’t want to miss this one.


Lesson 19 Here what it’s all about:

The Daily Security Tip is a way to further improve your
cyber security, through easy and actionable tips;
If you subscribe, we’ll send you an email every day with a
security tip;
We prepared 365 tips, enough to cover your protection for
a year;
The tips are accompanied by a GIF guaranteed to make
things fun(nier);
And yes, it’s all free!

Sign up to get your first tip

I can’t wait to see what you think about it!

And if you ever want to let me know what you loved the
most about Cyber Security for Beginners or about The
Daily Security Tip, feel free to hit reply on this (or any
other) email I send you.

Stay safe!
The Heimdal Security team

www.heimdalsecurity.com Online criminals hate us. We protect you from attacks that antivirus can’t block



About Heimdal Security

We are Heimdal and security is our passion

Since 2011, we have been developing The last years proved that information
new technologies and providing intel- theft and financial data leakage are
ligence to protect over 350,000 users major international issues, which
against cyber criminal attacks and continue to create security challenges
data security breaches. for organizations, as well as private

individuals. That's why our products
We protect users and companies from have been developed: to address the
cyber-criminal actions, by keeping real-world need for a solution against
confidential information and intellec- cyber-criminals actions and their
tual property safe. malicious tools.

Heimdal FREE HEIMDAL PRO HEIMDAL CORP
We keep you safe from We protect you from attacks We help you manage your
security exploits by auto- that antivirus can’t block, such network security from a
matically and silently as ransomware or sophisticated single, easy-to-use inter-
updating your vulnerable financial malware. Ensure your face to keep cyber-crimi-
software applications. system is proactively protected nals and data stealing

against cyber attacks using malware away from your
Heimdal PRO’s intelligence. company’s sensitive data.